# Song Building, Mastering Lyric Writing

## Songtown Songwriting Series Book 1


### TRANSCRIPT:
```
Welcome to Song Building
I'm Marty Dotson, a songwriter from Nashville, Tennessee.
I've written thousands of songs before and since
becoming a professional songwriter
and earning my living from songwriting.
I've written six number one songs
and have had more than 125 songs recorded by other artists,
including Joe Cocker, Carrie Underwood, Rascal Flats,
Kenny Chesney, Billy Currington,
The Plain White Tees, Don Williams, Johnny Reed,
Billy Ray Cyrus, Diamond Rio, Buddy Jewel, Lone Star,
John Michael Montgomery, The Oak Ridge Boys,
Ricochet, Craig Morgan, Tracy Lawrence,
Saving Jane, Big and Rich, Steep Canyon Rangers,
Songs from the Road Band, and most recently, Blake Shelton.
I've written songs for several musical genres, including pop, rock, country, and bluegrass.
And I just finished writing songs for two musical theater projects.
A first for me.
Because I live and write mostly country songs in Nashville and in English,
It may be hard to believe that I even co-wrote the K-pop song,
Bounce, that knocks Psy out of number one in South Korea
and won Song of the Year honors for South Korea and all of Asia.
I also co-founded Songtown USA, an online community of aspiring songwriters I teach and mentor.
Some of these songwriters have gone on to have their songs recorded and published,
and some have gotten music publishing deals.
Although I'm proud of these accomplishments,
I mention all of this not to brag,
but to tell you why you might want to listen to me and listen to this book.
I am a successful, full-time, professional songwriter.
Inspiration is rarely enough.
Most amateur songwriters wait for inspiration.
Songs come to them.
Often, they don't like to change a thing because,
quote, that's how it came to me, unquote.
In Nashville, songwriting involves much more than waiting for inspiration to strike.
It's a profession.
Professional songwriters treat songwriting like a job.
Most pro songwriters schedule writing appointments daily,
sometimes two or even three sessions a day.
We show up with ideas, chords, lyrics, and melodies,
sit down with another writer we may or may not know, and get to work.
It doesn't matter if we are tired that day or don't feel inspired.
We show up and write songs.
We don't wait to feel inspired.
Rather, we build songs.
The inspiration muse shows up while we are hard at work applying elbow grease,
building and reworking the song until it's the best that we can make it.
Song building.
It was in this context that I developed a method that helps me and others write our best songs quickly.
I call that method song building.
It consists of a number of elements, including structures, blueprinting, framing, furniture, and finishing touches.
In this book, I'll teach you about song building.
Deliberately creating a song when you decide to sit down and write one.
I will teach you how to apply my song building method to the songs you want to write or to songs you've already written,
increasing the likelihood they will strike a chord.
See what I did there?
With listeners.
And get recorded.
About my co-author.
Because most of my songs are co-written, I was delighted when one of the songwriters I have mentored,
Bill O'Hanlon, became so excited about the song building idea that he offered to co-write this book with me.
Bill has written or co-written 38 books, one of which, Do One Thing Different, resulted in him being featured on the Oprah Winfrey Show.
Having Bill on board helped me make the writing go more smoothly and much more quickly.
This book, despite being written with Bill, is solely in my voice.
This allows us to keep the pronouns clear and simple.
Chapter 1.
Song Structure and Blueprinting
Okay, let's jump right in.
Song blueprinting is at the heart of song building.
My co-author Bill took three torturous years to write his first book.
He told me he left blood on the keyboards.
In comparison, he wrote his last book in several months, writing only part-time.
And he told me it was a breeze.
What made the difference between writing his first and last books?
Bill had learned, through experience, to blueprint his books before starting to write them.
By blueprinting, I mean he takes time to pre-think what he is going to include,
and he decides what will go into each section of the book before he writes a single word.
That has made writing his books faster and easier, but also more joyful.
In the same way, the first and most crucial step in my song building method is to make sure you have a clear blueprint for your song before you start writing it.
If you were to start building a house with only a vague idea of having several bedrooms, a kitchen, and a bathroom,
you might discover in the middle of construction that you have left out something crucial, such as a garage or a laundry room.
Because you didn't think and plan ahead, you might find out too late there isn't actually enough room for the pantry door to fully open.
In essence, a song blueprint is a clear outline or map of your future song.
And in making that outline, you will boil each section of a song down to one simple idea.
Song blueprinting can even help you discover whether your song idea is interesting enough or has enough potential to bother putting in the time to write it.
If you learn to blueprint your ideas well, you will never get stuck in the second verse wondering what to say.
Song blueprinting can help you save time in co-writing as well.
When you are writing with a top songwriter or a recording artist who has a demanding schedule, time is precious.
Often, I only get to sit with an artist for an hour or two with no opportunity to schedule follow-up writing appointments for months, if at all.
So, song blueprinting becomes an alignment exercise.
It quickly and efficiently gets everyone in the room writing the same song from word one.
The point of a song is to communicate and connect emotionally with the listener.
If your songs are not doing that as well or as often as you'd like, song blueprinting can also help you with that.
Clear communication is the key to connecting with an audience.
Whether it's an audience of one or millions.
Song blueprinting can help you whether you want to write a song for your own wedding or to pitch to Demi Lovato.
If anyone other than you is going to hear your song, you need to begin with a blueprint.
Good communication rarely happens by accident.
Modern commercial song structures.
Before teaching you about the specifics of song blueprinting, I first want to make sure we're all on the same page.
I want to make sure you know about song structures.
Structures are like the frames that home builders erect when building a house.
They make sure they have a solid structure and frame to support the building.
Through critiquing so many songs, I have learned not to assume that all songwriters are aware of modern song structures.
In order to apply song blueprinting, you must be aware of these structures.
Most modern songs use two main forms.
Form one, verse, pre-chorus, which is also called a channel or lift.
Chorus, verse, pre-chorus.
Sometimes we leave this out in verse two.
Chorus, bridge, also called the middle eight, and chorus.
Again, form one, verse, pre-chorus, also called a channel or lift.
Chorus, verse, pre-chorus.
Sometimes we leave this out in verse 2. Chorus, bridge, also called the middle eight, and chorus.
Form 2, verse, chorus, verse, chorus, bridge, chorus. Once again, verse, chorus, verse, chorus, bridge, chorus.
Of course, there are exceptions to this rule. Sometimes there is no bridge. Sometimes the chorus is repeated many times at the end.
Sometimes the song starts with the chorus, but often these are production choices that are made after the song is written.
There are also songs without choruses that use a refrain, one repeating line at the beginning or end of each verse.
However, most modern commercial songs use choruses instead of refrains.
To simplify, I have broken song blueprinting down to this form that can be easily adapted for any of the commercial song structures.
Verse 1 may or may not include a pre-chorus. Chorus, verse 2 may or may not include a pre-chorus. Bridge, only if needed.
So, to create a clear blueprint for your song, you really only have to blueprint two verses, the chorus, since it repeats, and the bridge, if you are planning to use one.
The pre-chorus is usually part of the verse idea. Things start to get complicated if you start trying to map out pre-choruses.
Most of the time, it's best to just come up with one big idea for the verse, including the pre-chorus, if you have one.
Purpose of each section of the song structure.
Next, let me give you my view of the purpose each of these sections serves.
Understanding this is crucial to creating clear and helpful song blueprints.
Each section of the song should be clear and take the song farther and deeper.
Each section should make sure it moves the song forward and doesn't repeat ideas, except for the chorus, of course,
which is designed to repeat or move the listener backwards for each of the sections below.
When you blueprint your song, write one simple, clear sentence or statement that communicates what you want to say in that section.
Purpose of the first verse.
The first verse is designed to introduce the listener to what is happening, who is singing, and to whom.
The way I say this is that the purpose of verse one is to introduce and establish the character's context and setting.
It should answer these questions if they are relevant to the song.
Who is singing?
To whom are they singing?
Where are they?
Now, this may not matter.
What is happening?
What is the relationship between the characters?
So, the job that verse one has to accomplish is to give listeners everything they need to know to follow along and understand the message of the song.
One of the problems we songwriters sometimes have is that we know what the song is about and we know it so implicitly that we forget that our listeners don't know what we know.
We forget to tell the story is that we know what we know.
We know what we know what we know what we know what we know.
grab the listener here and bring them with us, or we lose them. We all want to be on the same page
after listening to the first verse. Song blueprinting is a great way to make sure we
haven't left things out that could lose the listener or confuse them. As I mentioned above,
the first step in song blueprinting is to come up with a simple statement that says what that
section is going to communicate before you write it in lyrical form. Don't worry about it rhyming or
being clever or poetic. Just write it like you would say it to someone. Here are a few examples
from well-known songs. Verse 1, Purple Rain by Prince. I never meant to hurt you. Verse 1, Yesterday,
the Beatles. Yesterday, I thought things were fine, but since you left, they aren't. Verse 1, Proud Mary,
Creedence Clearwater Revival. I quit my job and I don't regret it. Verse 1, Happy by Pharrell Williams.
I may be crazy, but I'm so happy that nothing can bring me down. Verse 1, Body Like a Back Road, Sam Hunt.
I saw a girl who knocked me out and I had to meet her. Verse 1, Live like you were dying. I met a guy
who faced a terminal illness and I asked him how he handled it. You may notice that many of these have
two characters, the singer and his love interest, or the singer and a friend. It gets tricky trying to deal
with multiple characters in a song. Most hit songs involve the singer and one other character. Here's an
example from a song I co-wrote that became a hit called Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven. In the first verse,
we're introduced to two characters, a preacher and the singer. The preacher is lecturing the singer on Sunday
morning telling him he is sinning and not living right. And the preacher asked the singer, sinner,
don't you want to go to heaven? The setting is implied to be in a church, even though it's not
mentioned explicitly. Most people imagine a preacher being at a church on Sunday morning.
So we've established the characters, the time, the day, the relationship between the preacher and the
singer-sinner, and the context the preacher is trying to reform the singer-sinner, all in the first verse.
The first verse reads like this, Preacher told me last Sunday morning, Son, you better start living
right. Better quit the women and whiskey and carrying on all night. Don't you want to hear them call your
name? When you're standing at the pearly gates? I said, Preacher, yes, I do. But I hope they don't call today.
In some songs, we don't need to know where the characters actually are and where the action is
taking place, the setting, so that element isn't always necessary. But the other two elements, characters
and context, are crucial to communicate, so the listener isn't confused or left behind.
Try this with one of your songs. Sing the first verse to find people who have never heard it and ask them to tell you
what's happening in that first verse. If they are confused or give you five different answers,
make a first verse blueprint and rewrite the verse. Then try it on some more people and discover if you have made it clear
purpose of the chorus. If not, go back to the drawing board. You should get similar answers from each listener if you have communicated well.
Purpose of the chorus. The chorus is meant to be repeated and should contain the point of the song, the big idea and or emotion.
The big idea and emotion of my song, Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven is,
Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven,
but nobody wants to go right now.
In the next chapter, I'll talk about finding the big idea and emotion for the song.
But here, I'll just focus on song blueprinting the chorus.
In the chorus, you need to give the listener the point, the heart of the song.
The chorus almost always contains the title, which is usually a brief, even one-word statement
of the big idea or big emotion.
Generally, no further characters or storylines should be introduced in the chorus.
That would likely just confuse the listener and dilute the big idea or big emotion.
When you make your blueprint of the chorus, write a simple statement that conveys the message or summarizes the emotion.
Here are some examples of choruses from popular songs summarized in one statement.
Chorus, Life in the Fast Lane, The Eagles, Living the Fast Life Makes You Crazy.
Chorus, Margaritaville, Jimmy Buffett, I'm Drunk and I Can't Blame Anybody But Myself.
Chorus, Let It Be, The Beatles, Relax, Stop Struggling, Let Life Happen, And You'll Find Peace.
Chorus, The Man in the Mirror, Michael Jackson, Change Starts With Me.
Chorus, Bridge Over Troubled Waters, Simon and Garfunkel, I'm Here When You Need Me.
Chorus, Live Like You Were Dying to McGraw.
Live Like You Haven't Got Any Time to Waste.
Pursue Your Bucket List.
Remember, the chorus is the big idea of the song.
So make sure you are clear on what that big idea is as you map out the chorus.
Purpose of the Second Verse.
In verse 2, you should take the big idea or emotion further.
Be careful not to just repeat the first verse in different words.
That is like showing a slightly different camera angle in a movie,
but repeating the exact same dialogue or plot action.
It's boring.
You lose your listener anytime you start to back up.
Always keep your song moving onward and upward.
You only have a limited amount of words in a song.
Don't waste one that doesn't move your story forward.
Many beginning writers also make the mistake of introducing more characters, context, and setting in verse 2.
Giving more characters context and setting tends to back the story up instead of advancing it.
And it makes the song too confusing.
Most listeners are a bit distracted when they are listening to the song,
in the car or looking at their smartphones.
So anything that isn't clear may lose their interest.
My first publisher always said,
if you introduce a character in a song, then you have to feed them.
He meant, you can't just toss out someone new.
If you introduce someone else, there needs to be a compelling reason to do so.
And you need to develop that character as well.
In the span of three minutes, it's hard to feed and develop more than two to three characters.
Verse 2 answers the question,
Then what?
You've just introduced a big idea in your chorus.
So what happens next?
Verse 2 is the follow-up that transports your big idea or emotion to greater heights.
Or to use a different metaphor, verse 2 deepens the emotion.
Verse 2 may make the listener, when they hear the chorus again after the verse, think of the big idea in a different light, or see another meaning or aspect of the big idea.
Second verses can be song killers if you don't purposefully figure out something to say that advances your song.
So, pay special attention to your second verse blueprint.
The reward for doing so is that you will never again get stuck on your second verse if you start with a great blueprint.
You gain a lot of confidence as you write by knowing that something great is coming in each section.
That sure beats sitting around with your co-writers or alone asking, so what's left to say in the second verse?
Purpose of the bridge.
A bridge, also called the middle 8th, is a brief musical interlude that is in contrast to the verses and the choruses.
Sometimes it includes lyrics.
You may not need a bridge.
My first songwriting mentor, Kim Williams, told me often,
don't build a bridge if there's no river to cross.
If you have a bridge, it should take the big idea farther than verse 2 did,
sum up the whole song, or it could introduce a twist.
In every instance, it should advance the song.
Don't just repeat old information from other sections of the song if you're trying to sum up the song in the bridge.
Make it new, fresh, and interesting.
Above all, make sure it keeps the story moving forward.
I have a song called The Fish Weren't Biting.
The first verse has a couple packing up to go to the lake for a day of fishing.
When they get there, the chorus tells the listener the fish weren't biting.
The second verse tells the listener that the girl got bored and she asked her guy to put some sunscreen on her while she lies out in her bikini.
In the bridge, we reveal that the guy never baited the hooks and set it up so he could just love on his girl.
The listener finds out the fish weren't biting, our big idea, because he purposefully didn't want them to.
That makes the last chorus even more interesting because of the twist we introduced in the bridge.
Sometimes, bridges are just musical palette cleansers, and they don't need lyrics.
If there's nothing new to say that advances the story, just have an interesting musical departure or a fabulous guitar solo.
Or just skip the bridge and go right back to the chorus.
The ideal time frame for a commercial song these days is 2 minutes 45 seconds to 3 minutes.
Often, there's not enough time to add a bridge and keep things within that range.
I'd estimate that less than 25% of my songs have bridges.
The purpose of the outro.
The outro is a musical piece that ends the song if you need one.
Some songs stop cold at the end of the last chorus or another lyrical piece.
Most have an outro to close out the song.
You might write this outro, or the producer may create one in the recording process.
If you include an outro in the songwriting process, it usually doesn't need any new lyrics,
since it often repeats the last line of the chorus or some slight variation on it.
But at times, you may need to write new lyrics for an outro.
If you do want to write an outro, it can be a final twist or summary of the big idea or big emotion.
Complete song blueprinting example.
Here, so you can see how Jason Matthews and I wrote to the song blueprint,
are the complete lyrics to the song, Must Be Doing Something Right, which went to number one for two weeks.
This one was performed by country star Billy Currington.
Verse one.
A woman is a mystery a man just can't understand.
Sometimes all it takes to please her is the touch of your hand.
And other times you gotta take it slow.
Hold her all night long.
Heaven knows there's so many ways a man can go wrong.
Chorus.
Must be doing something right.
I just heard you sigh.
You leaned into my kiss and closed those deep blue need you eyes.
Don't know what I did to earn a love like this.
But baby, I must be doing something right.
Verse two.
Anywhere you want to go, baby, show me the way.
I'm open to suggestions.
Whatever you say.
Tonight's about giving you what you want.
Whatever it takes.
Girl, I hope I'm on the right road.
But judging by the smile on your face.
Must be doing something right.
I just heard you sigh.
You leaned into my kiss and closed those deep blue need you eyes.
Don't know what I did to earn a love like this.
But baby, I must be doing something right.
Half chorus.
An outro.
Don't know what I did to earn a love like this.
But baby, I must be doing something right.
Must be doing something right.
Must be doing something right.
About song length.
As you can see in the lyrics above, we didn't include a bridge in the song,
Must be doing something right.
We didn't think it needed one.
We had said everything we needed to say without a bridge.
After I write two verses and a chorus, I always play the song down.
And time it to make sure I'm not getting long-winded.
Then I decide if there's anything else I need to say.
If the song is close to three minutes already, I always opt out of a bridge.
Again, some of the length will be determined when the song is recorded and produced.
But you should aim to keep the song short and sweet,
editing out anything that isn't necessary or that doesn't fit with or deepen the big idea.
Create your first song blueprint.
Okay, now, if you are ready, it's time to try out this song blueprint thing.
I find that people I teach and coach learn much better when they actually put the method into practice.
Here's my suggestion.
Let yourself make mistakes and feel awkward doing this the first time.
Anytime you learn a new skill, it may feel strange or uncomfortable at first.
But trust me, when you start using this more and more, after a while, it can become second nature to you, like it is for me and many of my students.
First, find a song idea that excites you.
You might have some written down.
You might search for one.
I'll get into finding great song ideas later in the book.
Or one of your co-writers might have brought the idea into a co-write.
Next, write a simple statement that summarizes what you want to communicate in verse 1.
Keep working on it until it's clear and simple and you really like it.
Now, do the same for the chorus or big idea.
One sentence or phrase.
This will usually be the title you came up with or a slight variation on the title.
And do the same for verse 2.
Write down a simple sentence that takes the big idea farther and doesn't repeat the first verse.
This may be a challenge, but keep working with it until you get something cool if you can.
Remember, you're not trying to come up with rhymes or clever poetic lyrics yet.
Just the simple idea for each section.
Stop there and don't blueprint out a bridge.
You will likely be able to discover if you need a bridge as you write the song.
Again, I strongly recommend that you try this.
Flail around a bit and persist.
The method and the rest of the book will make so much more sense when you actually use it rather than just think about it.
Some keys to remember as you blueprint.
The more simple, clear, and direct you are, the easier it will be to write from your blueprint.
Try not to use any commas or ands when you blueprint.
Ands and commas are used to connect multiple ideas.
We want to try to have one simple idea for each section.
Commas and ands are signs that we are trying to pack too much into a section.
Keep your blueprint in the same voice as the song will be.
If your song is the singer talking to a lover and you will be using I and you in the song,
then keep the blueprint that way as well.
Phrases like you amaze me are the kind of simple ideas you are looking for in your blueprint.
Now, go give it a try.
The more you practice, the better you will get.
The idea for your blueprint is to open up possibilities for creative ways to write the song, not to limit them.
So just stick to what you want to communicate and don't drift over into what or how you're going to say it.
Chapter 2. Ideas and Hooks
Whether you start your song with a musical idea, chords, or a track,
at some point, you will need to decide what the song will be about lyrically.
Since your song is a short story, the idea should be clear and focused and always about one thing, one big idea.
When I say big, I mean big enough for lots of people to care.
The idea is at the heart of the lyrics in a song.
The idea should draw people in as much as the melodies and rhythms in your song.
The way to start the idea is to either come out with a title or a hook.
For my song, Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven, the hook was a slight variation on the title.
Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven, but nobody wants to go now.
This was sort of a punchline title.
The last line is the punchline of the joke, in a way.
For my recent Blake Shelton song, Doing It to Country Songs, the title was the hook, and it was repeated in the song more than 25 times.
Same with the Joe Cocker song I co-wrote.
The title and the hook were Fire It Up.
There were other lyrics in the chorus, but the hook was Fire It Up.
What makes a hook?
When the listener can sing the title slash hook after hearing it only a few times.
When Johnny Reed, with whom I co-wrote Fire It Up, first played it at a live concert,
he sent me a video showing the audience singing the hook line, Fire It Up, during the second chorus.
That's when we knew we had come up with a great hook.
The audience heard the chorus one time and could sing along.
That's a great sign.
The title, or hook, often starts or ends the chorus lyrically, or it repeats at both the beginning and the end.
So, how do you come up with memorable, hooky ideas?
Well, sometimes they come to you.
Write them down.
Have some way to record them and easily find them when it comes time to write or co-write.
Most people use their phones these days, but whatever works for you.
I use a simple database app that lets me categorize my ideas and sort them.
That way, I don't have to scroll through hundreds of ideas in a note on my phone or on paper.
I can quickly search for and find any idea.
But there are ways to be more deliberate about finding ideas rather than just waiting for a title or hook to come to you.
How to generate ideas, hooks, and titles.
When I am preparing for a co-write, I sit down and do some things to generate a number of ideas for titles and hooks.
Quotation sites.
One of my favorite things to do is to Google the term love quotes.
You'll see a bunch of links come up.
But one of my best sources for hooks and titles is to click on images of love quotes.
This brings up images from Pinterest or other photo sites in which people have created graphic versions of quotations about love and relationships.
Or images in which they put something they feel deeply about love or their own relationships.
Every time I do this exercise, I find several hooks or title ideas.
Sometimes I just jot down one small part.
And other times, I write down the whole quotation.
Another method that is similar, but I like even better than using a general search, is to go to a site called reallifewisdom.com.
That's real spelled R-E-E-L, lifewisdom.com.
This is a site of quotations from Movie Dialogue.
If you get your ideas from this site, you and I will be likely writing some of the same titles, but that's okay.
The best song is going to win.
And we are all looking for song ideas in the same places.
You can search this site by topics, too.
Again, try love, relationships, heartbreak, success, or whatever other topics you can come up with that you think might yield some inspiration.
I rarely walk away with less than three really promising ideas or hooks after just a few minutes of using this site.
Random pages slash words in a book or magazine.
Hit songwriter Gary Burr was once home alone on a weekend and he was bored.
He decided to try a method he'd heard about to challenge himself to write his next song.
He would open a magazine and randomly put his finger on one of the pages and write a song using the phrase his finger had landed on.
He opened to an article about a band that had been on tour and stopped at the Alamo.
The phrase was, in front of the Alamo.
A challenge indeed.
But Gary soldiered on and wrote a song called In Front of the Alamo.
That was subsequently recorded by country artist Hal Ketchum and Leanne Rimes.
So how about trying that as an idea generation method?
It may take you a few tries and a few pages.
But open a book, magazine, or newspaper at random and plunk your finger down until you find a phrase that inspires you.
Make that, or part of it, your hook or song idea.
Book titles.
Titles are not copyrightable.
But it's best to stay away from writing titles that are already well known.
If someone sees your song called Yesterday, they probably won't want to record it.
Paul McCartney and the Beatles pretty much laid claim to that one forever.
On the Road Again is probably associated with Willie Nelson for the duration.
But mining book titles for hooks, titles, and ideas can be fertile ground and avoid that kind of conflict.
My co-author Bill wrote a best-selling book about relationships called Love is a Verb that was featured on Oprah.
So far, he knows of at least three songs that were inspired by that book and title.
Love is a Verb by John Mayer.
Love, L-U-V, is a Verb by DC Talk.
And Love is Something That We Do by Clint Black and Skip Ewing.
Darn, Bill is wondering.
Why didn't I think of that?
All the Pretty Girls, recorded by Kenny Chesney and written by Tommy D. James, Nicole Galleon, and Joss Osborne,
was inspired by the book by the same title, a thriller, set in Nashville.
Lynn Anderson's hit, I Never Promised You a Rose Garden, written by Joe South,
was inspired by the book about a psychiatric patient that was popular around the time that the song was written.
Inversions or variations of well-known phrases.
Take a well-known phrase and change it into its opposite, or introduce some variation for that phrase to generate a title, hook, or idea.
Garth Brooks' Friends in Low Places, co-written by Dwayne Blackwell and Earl Bud Lee, is a good illustration of this method.
Sugarland's tongue-in-cheek hit,
It Happens, written by Jennifer Nettles, Christian Bush, and Bobby Pinson, is a variation on a well-known and somewhat crude saying.
Another song that represents this idea is Sam Hunt's Leave the Night On, written by Hunt, Shane McAnally, and Josh Osborne.
Tony Braxton's hit, Unbreak My Heart, written by Diane Warren, does this in a unique and straightforward way.
Miranda Lambert's hit, The House That Built Me, written by Alan Shamblin and Tom Douglas, reverses a phrase and comes up with a unique song idea.
Exercise.
Take a few minutes and write down some common phrases and sayings and work on them until you come up with some cool and intriguing variations of them.
Lines from Movies or TV Shows.
George Strait's hit, Blue Clear Sky, written by John Gerard.
Mark D. Sanders and Bob DiPiro came directly from the movie Forrest Gump.
Strait even tried to sing it as Clear Blue Sky before the songwriters explained that the twist on the usual phrase was from the movie,
which had been seen by millions of people who would appreciate the reference.
When the movie Jerry Maguire came out, with its signature line,
You Had Me at Hello.
You could almost see the songwriters in movie theaters in Nashville at the time, taking out their notebooks and writing down that line as the hook for their next co-writing session.
Kenny Chesney's version, co-written with Skip Ewing, won that particular race, as Kenny's was the hit version.
Listen for lines, hooks, and inspiration while you're watching movies and TV shows.
Read lyrics by top songwriters.
Another way to stimulate song ideas and hooks is to read books or lyrics by top songwriters.
Not only is this good in terms of having top-notch examples, but you may find some words or phrases that trigger ideas or hooks in your own mind.
Obviously, be careful not to steal any lyrics directly.
Rhyme lines book.
I have a book that is great for giving me ideas.
It is out of print, but you can usually find a copy of it used on Amazon.
It's called Rhyme Lines.
It's filled with expressions, phrases, slang, quotations, famous names, and places, and other words that rhyme.
I don't really use it as a rhyming dictionary most of the time, but instead, when I'm searching for hooks and ideas,
I just open a few pages at random and inevitably find something that I can use as a hook or something that inspires me to create a hook or idea.
Things People Say
Songwriters are a bit like novelists who are always eavesdropping on strangers' conversation in public
to find snippets of dialogue that make their fiction sound more realistic.
Songwriters usually have their antennae out while conversing with friends, loved ones, work colleagues, or anybody they interact with in the course of their daily lives.
Songwriter Rivers Rutherford was at an event, and a friend came up to Rivers and his wife and said,
You know why I like your husband?
Because he's a real bad boy, but he's also a real good man.
Since this was at a songwriting event, Rivers quickly looked around to see if any of the other nearby songwriters had noticed this phrase,
or were jotting down the idea in their notebook or their phones.
None were.
So the next day, Rivers brought the idea to a co-write with George Tarrant that became a number one country billboard song called Real Good Man, recorded by Tim McGraw.
Keep your ears open and antennae out for great song ideas and hooks in everyday life.
Write them down so you don't forget them and confine them the next time you need an idea.
Objects
There are many ways to find song ideas, but let me offer just one more here.
Look around and identify objects in your environment.
See if you can use any of those objects to inspire a song hook or idea.
As I look around, I see a key, an empty chair, a fireplace, a window pane, some tissues, a pillow, a framed photograph, a box of matches, and other things.
Any of those might inspire a story idea, hook, line, or phrase.
Toby Keith had a big old hit with a song about a red solo cup.
Duh.
How many of those have I held in my hands through the years?
Yet, it never occurred to me to write a song about one.
Universal Emotions as Song Themes
You can write a song about anything, but it's probably best to stick to Universal Emotions if you want your song to have an impact and engage the listener.
Here are some Universal Emotions and Song Examples in each category.
Love
Well, no surprise here.
Songs like Eight Days a Week, I Honestly Love You, and Endless Love are still standards.
Unrequited Love, I Can't Make You Love Me, and He Stopped Loving Her Today are examples.
Wondering About the Meaning of Life, Dust in the Wind, and The Good Stuff are big hits written around this idea.
Cheating and Being Cheated On, Third Rate Romance, and Does He Love You are great songs hitting this feeling from different angles.
Loss.
Where have you been?
When I was your man, and why didn't I think of that?
Deal with this topic in both funny and serious ways.
Wanting to have a good time.
That's my kind of night.
Girls just want to have fun.
And I Love This Bar are examples of songs exploring this feeling.
The nostalgic feeling of looking back at something good.
Anything But Mine and Summer of 69 are good examples.
Wanting to get away and escape from something.
Escape, the Pina Colada song.
And Fly Like an Eagle are monster hits on this theme.
Make your song idea universal.
Because we write stories, and we need to put some specific details in our songs to make them engaging and vivid,
we have to be careful that we make our songs universal so everyone can relate.
If we get too personal and detailed, it can be like inviting people over to show them photos of your last vacation.
A few photos or short videos might be fine to give others a sense of the trip, the place, and what happened.
But sitting through every photo or video you took would be boring, and your visitors probably wouldn't care or would tune out pretty quickly.
No one wants to see every rock you saw on your Colorado vacation or your children posed in front of 5,000 landmarks.
So you have to find a balance between the personal and detailed and the universal if you want everyone to relate to your song.
I made this mistake early on in my professional songwriting career.
One of my early songs was a song about my grandparents and how my grandmother stopped being happy for the 25 years she lived on after my grandfather died.
I really thought I nailed the song lyric and captured the situation perfectly.
It was called, She Stopped Living the Day He Died.
I excitedly played it for my publisher when it was finished, and he said,
Wow, you really wrote that well.
But that is the saddest crap I have ever heard.
Nobody is going to sing that.
It's just a story about your grandmother that is really depressing.
At first, I was devastated because I thought I'd written a great song.
Hey, my family all loved it.
The more experience I got and the more I thought about it, the more I realized my publisher was right.
The story was too personal and also too sad.
No artist would want to get up on stage and sing this song that was just about my grandmother.
It would lose their crowd.
No artist is going to risk that.
If I could have taken my story and made it broader, where more people could connect, it might have worked.
Rather than sticking to the strict factual details of the situation, you might want to capture more of a universal emotion, truth, and story with your song.
We should always ask ourselves, when we come up with a hook or idea for a song, who cares?
Is this something that people will love and care about enough to listen to?
Is this a fresh take on an idea or has it been done too many times already?
Is it universal enough so that most people will relate to it and be moved by it?
If it doesn't meet those standards, find another idea or hook and write that instead.
One of the good things about using song blueprinting is that you can try out different angles and slants on your titles, ideas, and hooks before you start writing.
I call that song framing.
You should persist until you find a unique frame of reference for your song.
Because there are only so many universal emotions that songs are written about, your task is to frame that emotion with a slant that no one else has used.
Often, the first angle may be the most cliched or boring take on the idea.
The first idea you think of may be the first idea that everyone would think of.
Hit songs tend to be less obvious approaches to a title or hook.
Digging a little deeper and finding a different slant can separate your song from all the others out there and get people, publishers, listeners, and artists to pay attention.
You can take your song lyrics from commonplace to catchy if you use one of the methods I will detail in this chapter to take your song in an unexpected direction.
Dirk's Bentley song, Black, written by Bentley, Ross Copperman, and Ashley Gorley, is a good example of taking a title, hook, and idea and coming at it from an unexpected angle.
You would think that Black would be about feeling depressed or bad things happening.
Instead, the songwriters made it a seduction song about using the sense of touch in a blacked-out room and asking his lover to make him unconscious with her intense lovemaking.
The writers of Girl Crush, Lori McKenna, Hilary Lindsay, and Liz Rose, a hit for Little Big Town, takes an angle you wouldn't expect from a female singer and three female writers.
When you first see or hear the title, you might think this is a song about same-sex attraction, something like Katy Perry's I Kissed a Girl.
But it's not about that at all.
It's a song about envying the new girl the singer's previous partner is now with, since she gets to spend time with, love, and kiss the former boyfriend.
That's unexpected.
That's a great frame.
Associations.
One way to brainstorm other angles is to write down any associations to the title and the idea that you've come up with.
Sam Hunt's hit, Body Like a Back Road, is a good example of using association to come up with lyrics and a unique angle for your idea, hook, or title.
One could imagine that Sam and his co-writer sat down and wrote down a number of phrases related to female bodies and roads and then found some that fit perfectly into the story that they wanted to tell.
Another thing they might have written down was that cars have seats that recline.
Now me and her go way back like Cadillac seats was one of their catchy lines.
Think of the Eagles song Hotel California.
If they had written on a piece of paper all the things they could think of relating to hotels and California before they started writing the song,
they would have likely had some of their lyrics on that sheet.
Desert Highway, Corridor, Courtyard, Chamber, Plenty of Room, Mirrors on the Ceiling, Champagne on Ice, Checkout, and Wine could have all been on their association list and ended up making it into the lyrics of that song.
Let's say your song idea had the word train in it.
If you're not going to be a song, you could come up with track, wreck, engineer, switching tracks, station, platform, ticket, suitcase, car, crossing, caboose, engine, passenger, schedule, late, all aboard, onboard, conductor, locomotive, freight train, diesel, railway, coach, car, carriage, trip, travel.
Express, high speed, express, high speed, bullet train, commuter, dining car, Orient Express, flying Scotsman, and many others.
This list could really be helpful to bringing some life into your lyrics and giving you ideas for lyrical lines while writing your song.
Here's an exercise.
When you come up with a hook, title, or idea, take a few minutes and write down all the ideas, objects, phrases, and associations that you have to that idea.
Then, when writing your song, refer to that page of associations for some possible lyric ideas.
Analogies and Similes
Body Like a Back Road uses analogies as well to make the lyrics more interesting and unusual.
In addition to the car seats analogy I mentioned before, the writers compare the singer's girl's hips to honey.
So thick and so sweet.
My song, Love is Like Rain, uses a simile.
This thing is like this other thing.
We explore some of the ways love is similar to rain.
You never know how long it's going to last.
No one can make it stay.
If you don't use the word like, but still imply or spell out parallels, you are using an analogy.
Love is a Rose by Neil Young is a good example of using analogy in a title and a song.
Another song, The Rose, written by songwriter Amanda Broom and made famous by Bette Midler, uses many analogies in it.
In it, love is likened to a river, a razor, a hunger, and a flower.
Another well-known Bette Midler song, Wind Beneath My Wings, likened someone the singer knows to the wind that helps the singer soar.
Exercise
Make a list of all the objects or life situations love could be like.
Love is like a hurricane.
Love is like a house.
Love is like a holiday.
Love is like a meal.
Come up with your own, and if you find one that turns you on, love is like a light.
Use that as the start of your song.
Opposites
My song, The Truth About Lies, uses this method in the title.
But you can use it to make unique lyrics as well.
My co-author, Bill, just wrote a song called Always Say Never.
Elvis has a song called I Forgot to Remember to Forget.
You got the idea.
My former publisher, Clint Black, had an amazing song called A Bad Goodbye that went on to be a huge hit.
J.D. Souther took a similar idea, a breakup, and called it Pretty Goodbye.
A closely related method is to use the language form called oxymoron.
You use oxymoron when you put two opposite words together in one phrase, such as sweet sorrow, sad smile, good hurt, and so on.
My frequent co-writer, Clay Mills, co-wrote a song called Beautiful Mess using this language form.
The Beatles song Hard Day's Night is another example.
Tim McGraw's hit, Live Like You Were Dying, written by Tim Nichols and Craig Wiseman, uses this opposites method as well.
Songwriter Gary Burr's song, Nothing About Love Makes Sense, recorded by Leanne Rimes, has a song full of oxymoron in the verses, including Baby Grand and Jumbo Shrimp.
Gary says he always wanted to find a way to work Jumbo Shrimp into a song, and by gosh, he did.
Multiple meanings.
Multiple meanings.
I use this method in my song Lie, Cheat, or Steal, recorded by Big and Rich.
The singer is giving a toast to newlyweds at their reception.
He tells them that none of us are perfect, and we all lie, cheat, or steal at times.
But he recommends that they steal a kiss, cheat on death, and lie with the one that you love.
Blake Shelton recorded my song, Doing It to Country Songs, and it uses this multiple meanings method to good effect.
When you hear the title, you think of one thing, having sex.
And that is slyly implied throughout the song, but we included several other meanings, including waking up and driving to work, listening to the radio, playing pool with friends, dancing with a girlfriend, and other things one can do to country songs.
Likewise, my song Dirt, recorded by Dean Brody, uses several meanings for the title and hook.
The first verse talks about the singer as a young kid playing in the dirt and getting his clothes dirty.
In the second verse, the singer falls in love with a rodeo queen who falls off a bronco and looks beautiful covered in dirt.
The last verse is about being in the grave under the dirt.
Thinking outside the box.
Give yourself permission to think of and set aside the most obvious angles at the start.
Sometimes my co-writers and I actually say, what are the most obvious angles to write for this idea?
By identifying those, we can then move on to the question, is there a really weird or unique way to approach this title or idea?
One rule I try to establish in every writing room I enter is, there are no stupid ideas.
In my co-writes, we say every stupid thing that comes to mind.
Why?
Because the stupid ideas often lead us to great ideas.
By giving ourselves permission to suck, we also give ourselves permission to really get out of the box and think of interesting angles on our idea.
I believe that the highest level of creativity is only possible if there is no punishment for throwing out something bad.
Give yourself and your co-writers permission to be stupid and you'll find some greatness in the stupidity.
Try to find every angle on your title.
Sometimes I'll challenge my co-writers by saying, let's try to figure out every possible way to write this title.
We start throwing out all kinds of crazy scenarios.
We explore every obvious angle.
Then we pick the most interesting angle and start blueprinting it out.
This method can be really interesting because you'll come up with angles that you never imagined at the start.
Trying to exhaust all options is a great creative exercise.
Find the truth in your idea.
I'm continually trying to discover the underlying universal truth in a title.
When I hear a title, I ask myself, how does this ring true to me?
Sometimes it relates to a life experience I've had.
Other times it coincides with something I feel strongly about.
Finding the universal truth is important because that is what connects us to our listening audience.
For my song to get recorded, it has to connect with a broad audience in such a way that they want or need to hear it.
That only happens if I give them a truth that they buy into.
When you come up with a title, find the truth in it and write to that truth.
For instance, in my song, Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven, the big truth is that even people who believe in heaven don't want to go there right now.
In my song, Must Be Doing Something Right, the truth is men struggle to know how to please a woman.
My song, Let Me Down Easy, digs into the truth that many men are afraid to be vulnerable and fall in love.
If you can find the universal truth in an idea, then you can brainstorm titles, concepts, and angles that support that truth.
Ideas that ring true are always more universally appealing than ideas that feel manufactured or fake.
Final thoughts on finding a unique angle and song frame.
Coming up with a great song is a perfect storm of talent, planning, inspiration, and luck.
But writing good lyrics with a boring angle will likely sink your song.
The listeners will be bored thinking, I've heard this song.
So take some time and dig deeply to come up with an angle that will excite you to write.
Bring some energy to the co-writing room if you're working with others.
And grab the listener.
Chapter 4. Song Furniture
Elevating Your Song Lyrics with Details, Texture, and Spice
There is a well-known saying writers use when teaching others about writing.
Show, don't tell.
What does this mean for song lyric writing?
It means to give the listener enough details so they can draw their own conclusions
rather than spelling out what they should feel or think.
One of the best ways to do this is using what songwriters call furniture.
When you are writing a vague or poetic song, it's as if you brought your listener into an empty room.
Populating your song with furniture gives the listener something to rest on,
something to relate to, something to see.
Once you have found your unique angle on the song, the next step is to write lyrics that evoke emotion and convey your story vividly.
Contrast this admittedly not very well-written verse I came up with to a real-life song called
Young Love, Strong Love.
There is a boy I really want to date.
I'm not sure what he's called.
But I've been seeing him around a lot of late, and I feel like I'm ready to fall.
My made-up verse is telling the listener all about what I am thinking and feeling.
Now, check out the actual song that powerfully uses the show-don't-tell principle,
and you'll quickly get the difference.
She was sitting cross-legged on the hood of a Ford, filing down her nails with an embroidery board,
talking to her friends about people they knew, and all of the things that young girls do.
When she said, you see that guy in the baseball cap?
I'd like to spend some time with a boy like that.
Betty said, I've seen him at the hardware store.
I think his name is Billy, but I'm not sure.
That, dear reader, is furniture.
It allows you not only to know, but visualize what's going on in the story.
Let's take a closer look.
Landing the plane.
When I mentor songwriters and critique lyrics,
one of the most common things I work with them on is making their lyrics less vague and poetic
and more conversational and real.
Many lyrics I see are like a plane that is at 30,000 feet.
I can get the general sense of what's happening on the ground,
but I can't make out any details.
The way to land the plane is to include specific sensory details in the lyrics.
What can you see, hear, touch, smell, or taste in the situation?
A simple way to think about this is to imagine you are seeing a video
of the situation you are writing your song about.
You don't have a mind-reading machine to see inside people,
so you're going to have to describe what your characters are doing
to give the listener insight into what they're feeling and thinking.
We do things based on what we feel and think.
That's an important concept to remember.
Contrast these lines to see the difference.
I know you're still mad at me versus you turn your back when we lie in bed at night.
In one, you're telling the listener what is going on.
In the other, you use sensory details and actions to land the plane
and let the listener draw their own conclusions.
Consider these two lines in Tim McGraw's hit, The Highway Don't Care, written by Brad Warren,
Brett Warren, Josh Keer, and Mark Irwin.
I bet you got a dead cell phone in your shotgun seat.
I bet you're bending God's ear talking about me.
You can see the scene, can't you?
How about these vivid lyrics from I Drive Your Truck, written by Jesse Alexander,
Connie Harrington, and Jimmy Erie?
89 cents in the ashtray.
Half-empty bottle of Gatorade rolling on the floorboard.
That dirty Braves cap on the dash.
Dog tags hanging from the rear view.
Old skull can and cowboy boots.
And a Go Army shirt folded in the back.
Such visual and specific lyrics.
This is what you should aim for in writing your songs,
if you want to keep people engaged and interested in them.
When Paul Williams and Roger Nichols wrote the song,
We've Only Just Begun, that the Carpenters took up the charts.
It actually started as a song for a bank commercial, by the way.
They looked for a way to describe newlywed love and found the words,
White Lace and Promises.
Those are things you can see and hear.
Here is a quick test to use.
Read over your lyrics.
Can you imagine a video of the scene you were describing,
where is there nothing playing on your imaginary video from your lyrics?
In this chapter, I'll give you a number of ways
to bring more sensory-based words to your lyrics,
as well as some other ways to add spice and texture
to engage the listener and make your song stand out.
Elements of Furniture
There are many ways to add furniture and texture to your lyrics.
I'll just mention the top elements most skilled songwriters use
to spice up their writing and give you some examples in each category.
Locations
Specific place names
This could include states, countries, cities, retail locations, intersections, and such.
Here are some examples.
There is not enough wind in Oklahoma.
Standing on a corner in Winslow, Arizona.
She was sitting on a stool at the Bar Nun Bar.
Take this child, Lord, from Tucson, Arizona.
Blue Bayou.
Green Frog Cafe.
Philadelphia Freedom.
Tulsa Time.
Under the Boardwalk.
On Broadway.
Penny Lane.
California Dreamin'.
Route 66.
Sweet Home Alabama.
Wichita Lineman.
Galveston.
By the time I get to Phoenix.
New York.
New York.
England Swings.
California Girls.
Back in the USSR.
Georgia On My Mind.
Standing on the corner of 12th Street and Vine.
People's or Animals Names.
Using people's names is a tried and true method of adding interest and specifics to your lyrics.
There are so many examples from well-known and hit songs of the songwriter using a name.
Hey Jude.
Ruby, don't take your love to town.
Ruby Tuesday.
Ruby Ruby.
Lots of rubies, aren't there?
Jennifer Juniper.
Runaround Sue.
Maybelline.
Jolene.
Michelle.
Ode to Billy Joe.
Hit the road, Jack.
Walk away, Renee.
Mustang Sally.
The wind cries Mary.
Me and Bobby McGee.
Eleanor Rigby.
Hey Joe.
Peggy Sue.
My Sharona.
You get the idea.
There are other songs that use animals' names as well.
She ran Colin Wildfire.
And a bull named Fu Manchu.
Are some good examples.
Times.
Dates.
Days.
Seasons.
Parts of the day or night.
Bobby Gentry's Ode to Billy Joe.
Starts with a great line.
It was the third of June.
Another sleepy, dusty, delta day.
This gives us a good introduction to the context by placing us in a season on a specific date.
She goes on to introduce some of the characters, including the singer, with the next line.
I was out chopping cotton and my brother was bailing hay.
Great detail.
Great opening line.
Many other songs use time, dates, seasons, or time of day or night to add furniture.
Here are some well-known song titles in this category.
After midnight.
Tequila sunrise.
Night fever.
Yesterday.
Midnight train to Georgia.
Sunday, bloody Sunday.
Monday, Monday.
The boys of summer.
Summer in the city.
1999.
A hard day's night.
In the midnight hour.
Will you love me tomorrow.
And summer of 69.
Colors.
You can add some color to your lyrics by using colors in them.
Well-known songs that use colors include blue suede shoes, coat of many colors.
Brown sugar.
White rabbit.
Little pink houses.
Painted black.
Purple haze.
Back in black.
Mellow yellow.
Blue bayou.
Old brown shoes.
Blue ain't your color.
Raspberry beret.
The man in black.
Purple rain.
Brown-eyed girl.
Little red Corvette.
Tangled up in blue.
Whiter shade of pale.
Weather.
Pour on weather-related words to make your lyrics shine.
Here are some examples.
Good day sunshine.
Hurricane.
Blue eyes crying in the rain.
Walking on sunshine.
You are my sunshine.
Ain't no sunshine.
Walking in the rain.
Singing in the rain.
Fire in rain.
Who'll stop the rain?
Sunshine of your love.
Blowing in the wind.
Objects.
Rihanna's umbrella.
Pink Floyd's.
Another brick in the wall.
Elton John's.
Candle in the wind.
Are all examples of using object names in song titles.
But using them in the body of the lyric is even better to give texture to your lyrics.
Body parts.
Piece of my heart.
Heart of gold.
Heart of glass.
Your cheating heart.
Popsicle toes.
I only have eyes for you.
I want to hold your hand.
Private eyes.
Crazy arms.
Behind blue eyes.
Eye of the tiger.
Cheek to cheek.
Don't it make my brown eyes blue.
Doctor my eyes.
Down on my knees.
Two left feet.
Fat bottom girls.
Felt good on my lips.
First time ever.
I saw your face.
One hand in my pocket.
Head games.
Head over boots.
Hungry heart.
I've just seen a face.
She's got legs.
Lion eyes.
Ring on every finger.
One a man with a slow hand.
And sunshine on my shoulders.
Sunshine on my shoulders.
Are all great examples of using a body part in a song or title.
Numbers.
Another way to add detail is to include some specific numbers in your lyrics.
96 tears.
A million reasons.
One is the loneliest number.
Less than zero.
99 problems.
99 red balloons.
And 8 miles high.
Show some ways that songwriters have used this category of furniture in their songs.
Brand names.
You generally don't need permission from companies to use brand names.
So, songwriters have used them freely over the years to add interest and engagement to the lyrics.
Here are some examples.
Drove my Chevy to the levee.
I've got a Nikon camera.
He shoot Coca-Cola.
She'll have fun, fun, fun.
Till daddy takes her T-Bird away.
Pink Cadillac.
Oh, Lord, won't you buy me a Mercedes-Benz?
My friends all drive Porsches.
We can try to understand the New York Times effect on man.
As I was motivating over the hill,
I saw Maybelline in a Coupe de Ville.
A Cadillac a-rolling on the open road.
Nothing will outrun my V8 Ford.
Of course, try to use brand names that most people would know,
so you don't confuse your listeners.
And use the brand names in a positive way if you can,
so you don't upset the company that owns the brand.
Specific actions.
Descriptive verbs.
Instead of drinking a beer,
what about having your song character nurse, chug, bum, or sip a beer?
Using more interesting and vibrant verbs to describe action in songs can really engage the listener,
and create images and feeling within them.
Tangled instead of involved with creates a more compelling sense of what is happening.
Dig deeper and find the uncommon verb or descriptive word that can add life and interest for the listener,
evoke more feeling for them.
Age.
Many songs add specifics by using ages.
Sweet little 16.
Only 16.
18 and I like it.
I learned the truth at 17.
She was just 17.
You know what I mean.
When I was 17, it was a very good year.
Edge of 17.
Hey, 19.
We've got nothing in common.
Are just a few that come to mind.
Dialogue.
To reference Ode to Billy Joe again,
Bobby Gentry uses dialogue to bring us to the moment and engage us in the scene.
Papa said to Mama as he passed around the black-eyed peas,
that Billy Joe never had a lick of sense.
Pass the biscuits, please.
Quoting what people say in your song can be a good way to bring your song to life.
What would you do if I sang out of tune?
Would you stand up and walk out on me?
Is the Beatles' way of drawing you into a little help from my friends with a little bit of dialogue.
Willie Nelson brings us to an encounter with an old lover.
With this bit of dialogue in his song, Funny How Time Slips Away.
Well, hello there.
My, it's been a long, long time.
How am I doing?
I guess I'm doing fine.
Johnny Cash and June Conner had dialogue all through their song, Jackson.
Well, go on down to Jackson.
Go ahead and wreck your health.
Go play your hand, you big talking man.
Make a big fool of yourself.
You're going to Jackson.
Go comb your hair.
Honey, I'm going to snowball Jackson.
See if I care.
Harry Chapin's Cats in the Cradle uses father-son dialogue on the verses.
When you coming home, dad.
Or this little snippet from Miranda Lambert's hit, The House That Built Me, written by Alan Shamblin and Tom Douglas, about someone who returns to the house in which they grew up.
Ma'am, I know you don't know me from Adam.
But these handprints on the front steps are mine.
Up those stairs, in that little back bedroom, is where I did my homework and I learned to play guitar.
And I bet you didn't know, under that live oak, my favorite dog is buried in the yard.
Another impressive example is Dean Dillon's song, The Chair, which was recorded by George Strait.
Dean does a wonderful job of describing an entire conversation, but he only tells you the singer's half of the conversation.
This is hard to do, but brilliant if you can pull it off.
Well, excuse me, but I think you've got my chair.
No, that one's not taken.
I don't mind if you sit here.
I'll be glad to share.
Yeah, it's usually packed here on Friday nights.
Oh, if you don't mind, but I talk you out of a light.
Check out the entire lyric if you want to see the rest of this story so masterfully told.
You can tell what the woman is saying by the singer's responses to her.
That's why Dean is in the Hall of Fame.
Noun Modifiers
Another way you can add furniture to your songs is by coming up with interesting modifications.
Modifiers to your nouns.
Betty Davis eyes.
Tiny dancer.
Brown-eyed handsome man.
Bad moon rising.
All use these extra modifiers to make the words more interesting, specific, and engaging.
One of my songs has a line,
Those deep blue need you eyes.
People often tell me that this is their favorite line in the song.
Why?
Because it's interesting and you haven't heard it before.
I can't make you love me.
Has a killer line that adds deep meaning with just one word modifying the noun.
I will lay down my heart in these final hours.
The word final makes a huge impact in this line.
And the cars threw a couple of these into one line in their song,
My Best Friend's Girl.
You've got your nuclear boots and your drip dry glove.
My co-writer Bill recently wrote a song that contained the lyric,
You really took me by surprise,
With those baby don't you want me eyes.
The recent country hit,
Written in the Sand,
Recorded by Old Dominion,
And written by Brad Francis Tersey,
Matthew Thomas Ramsey,
Shane L. McAnally,
And Trevor Joseph Rosen,
Has this line with a noun modifier.
Are we last call kissing?
Or will we be reminiscing with each other
For the next 40 years?
Last call kissing communicates a lot in a unique way.
Play around with your nouns and add texture by using words or phrases
To modify your nouns and make them more interesting.
Phrases turned into nouns.
My co-author Bill wrote a song with Chuck Jones and Diana Taub a while back
That has this line in it.
I guess one too many slamming doors.
I don't need you anymore.
This gave Bill the idea that another way to add furniture in songs
Is to turn phrases into nouns.
Singer-songwriter Josh Ritter has a line that uses this form in his song,
Joy to You.
I drink what they pour me,
The cups of who cares.
The Thomas Rhett-Maron Morris song,
Craving You,
Has the line,
All the in-between is killing me.
Tim McGraw and Catherine Dunn's hit Diamond Rings and Old Barstools,
Written by Barry George Dean,
Jonathan David Singleton,
And Luke Laird has the line,
The I love you's,
The I told you so's.
Walker Hayes' You Broke Up With Me,
Co-written with Kylie Marie Sackley,
And Thomas Archer,
Has a few of these kinds of lines.
Darling,
You can't crash my party with your sorries and what are we's,
And ain't nobody making you watch me get my forget you on.
And finally,
John Perdiz hit Head Over Boots,
Which he wrote with Luke Laird has the line,
Put that feel good on my lips.
Start creating some cool phrases turned into nouns,
So you can have them for future co-writes,
Or just learn the technique of creating them.
Moving furniture.
As I often say,
There are no rules in songwriting.
And there are many more ways to add furniture than I've given you here.
But these elements are a good start.
Using furniture is a great tool to make your lyrics more vivid,
And elevate your song to the next level.
To use a terrible pun,
Furniture can move the listener.
Furniture warning.
I will warn you that using furniture in songs is just like placing furniture in your house.
You want just the right amount of furniture in each room.
Too much furniture and the room becomes unusable.
Too little and the room isn't functional.
You wouldn't put five couches in your den.
One or two can do the job nicely.
It's the same with your song.
You need enough furniture to keep things interesting.
But not so much that it becomes a distraction.
Play around with adding more or less furniture to your songs.
And find that sweet spot to serve each idea best.
Because I have given you so many categories in this chapter on furniture.
I thought maybe you would like a quick summary of the most common categories for inserting furniture into songs.
Century-based words.
Century-based words.
Video talk.
These use any of the five senses.
Sight, sound, touch, taste, and smell.
And are also things you could see and hear if you had a video of the scene you're describing.
Painting a scene with props.
Painting a scene with objects.
This involves peppering your lyrics with objects to support the scene.
Like you would use props in a play.
Names.
Brand names.
People's names.
Place names.
Object names.
Using specific names in your lyrics.
Numbers.
Using specific numbers in your lyrics.
Times.
Times.
Of hour, day, week, month, year, seasons.
Using specific times, days, and dates in your lyrics.
Dialogue.
Quoting speech.
Quoting people's exact words and phrases.
Locations.
This means telling the listener exactly where the song is taking place.
Juicy verbs.
Using more interesting and evocative verbs to describe what is happening.
Modifying adjective or adjective phrases.
Adding an adjective that specifies and adds color to the noun.
Phrases turned into nouns.
Turning dialogue or word combinations into noun phrases.
Chapter 5.
Digging deeper into song blueprinting methods.
Give me six hours to chop down a tree.
And I will spend the first four sharpening the axe.
Abraham Lincoln.
Now let's get into more detail about how to create your best song blueprint.
The simplest way to do song blueprinting is to write down one sentence for each section of the song.
Keep in mind that when listeners are hearing your song, they often aren't giving it their full attention.
They aren't driving in their car, sitting at home, sitting at home, looking at their phone, or being distracted by people around them at the concert.
They aren't focused on understanding every little nuance of your lyric.
So, if anything isn't really clear, you could lose them.
Making a clear song blueprint helps you avoid things that would lose the casual listener.
Finding a balance between too vague and too specific in your song blueprinting.
You have to find a balance between being so specific that you lose flexibility in writing the song and being so vague that your song blueprint doesn't help you write the song or stay on track.
No ifs, ands, or buts.
One of the mistakes I see from less experienced songwriters is making each section summary too complicated.
If your one sentence or phrase summary in any section contains commas, colons, ands, or buts, you have probably made it too complicated.
All of those things serve to connect multiple ideas, and your goal is to break each section down into one simple idea.
Try editing it down to the simplest version you can come up with.
That leaves you and your co-writers with a clear blueprint and makes it more likely your listeners won't be confused or overwhelmed while listening.
Example of song blueprinting and the song that emerged from the blueprint.
Here's a song blueprint for one of my hits, Let Me Down Easy, recorded by Billy Currington.
Verse 1, I'm feeling something strong for you.
Chorus, if I fall in love with you, please let me down easy.
Don't hurt me.
Verse 2, I'm so taken by you that you fill my senses.
Notice that the blueprint does not tell what we are going to say.
It describes what we want to communicate to the listener.
It includes the big idea for each section of the song, but it says nothing about how we will communicate that big idea.
That is an important distinction.
Your blueprint just needs to define what you want the listener to take away from each section,
not describe the storyline you're going to use to get that message across.
Remember that verse 1 introduces characters, context, and setting.
The characters in Let Me Down Easy are the singer and the girl.
So that is pretty set, since we're probably going to write our lyrics in the first person.
I talking to you.
But we could, using the same blueprint, try writing the lyrics in second or third person as well to discover if they work better that way.
Here's an example of the same lyrics in first and then second and then third person.
I'm feeling something strong for you.
I'm feeling something strong for her.
He is feeling something strong for her.
And the setting could be many different places.
In a restaurant.
On a Ferris wheel.
On a cruise.
In a bedroom.
And so on.
That is one of the great things about song blueprinting.
If you take the lyrics in one direction and they aren't working,
for example, if you're stuck for rhymes or the lyric just doesn't excite you,
you can go back to the blueprint and find another direction.
The blueprint is the foundation of your song.
But there can be many different songs built on that foundation.
We could have taken verse 2 in many directions as well.
The singer could be getting down on his knees to propose.
He could be so nervous he can't get his words out when he is around her.
He could say something and have the words come out backwards.
If I were to summarize this song in one phrase, it would be,
I'm vulnerable, so please don't hurt me.
Here are the lyrics so you can compare them with the song blueprint.
Let me down easy.
Jennifer Hansen, Mark Nessler, and Marty Dodson.
There's a little moonlight dancing on the sand.
There's a warm breeze blowing by the ocean as you're taking my hand.
You need to know where I'm standing now.
That I'm right on the edge of giving in to you.
Baby, it's a long way down.
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
If I leave my heart with you tonight,
will you promise me that you're going to treat it right?
I'm barely hanging on.
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
The scent of your perfume floating in the air.
You're looking like an angel lying on a blanket with a halo of hair.
And those lips look too good to be true.
Once I taste that kiss, I know what'll happen.
I'll be at the mercy of you.
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
If I leave my heart with you tonight,
will you promise me that you're going to treat it right?
I'm barely hanging on.
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
If I leave my heart with you tonight,
you promise me, girl, you're going to treat it right.
I'm barely hanging on.
So if I fall, can you let me down easy?
If I fall, can you let me down easy?
Using your summary phrase in your lyrics.
Sometimes, if you have written your summary phrase well,
you may find you can even use it as one of your lines in that song section.
Here's a song blueprint for my song,
Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven.
Verse 1, my preacher told me I need to straighten up.
Chorus, I said, everybody wants to go to heaven,
but nobody wants to go now.
Verse 2, I told the preacher to put a good word in for me with God.
Bridge, someday I want to see heaven, but not for another hundred years.
When we wrote it, we used the chorus summary statement almost word for word,
and we used several words from the summaries in the actual lyrics.
Preacher, living right, God, I'm in no hurry, 100 years,
in several verses and the bridge.
An exercise.
Here's an exercise for you.
Try using the summary statement for each section as the first line in that section.
If you do that, then you simply have to flesh out the big idea in the rest of that section.
That's a technique I use very often.
State your main point for that section in a fun, creative way.
Then, flesh it out.
Do that with each section, and you'll usually have a strong lyric that says exactly what you wanted to say.
Huge concept in blueprinting.
If you have a good blueprint, it opens up possibilities.
A weak blueprint limits possibilities.
In our blueprint for Let Me Down Easy, we stated the big idea we wanted to communicate in each section.
But we didn't say what sort of furniture we were going to use or where the song would be set.
Look at it one more time.
Verse 1.
I'm feeling something strong for you.
Chorus.
If I fall in love with you, please let me down easy.
Don't hurt me.
Verse 2.
I'm so taken by you that you fill my senses.
A weaker, more limiting blueprint would have been verse 1.
A guy and his girl are at the beach, and he is admitting that he is falling in love with her.
Chorus.
The guy tells the girl that she needs to let him down easy if he does fall for her.
Verse 2.
The girl is laying on a blanket with her hair around her head like a halo, and he really wants to kiss her.
The first blueprint leaves things wide open.
We could have written that scenario in a thousand different locations or settings.
We had endless possibilities for ways to write to that blueprint.
The second blueprint locks us into one location and one storyline.
It's the equivalent of drawing up a blueprint for a house that predetermines every color of paint used in the house and every piece of furniture.
A great house blueprint works if you want granite or quartz countertops.
Carpet or hardwood flooring work equally well.
White or gray walls are both options.
The blueprint gives you the framework so that your creativity can build a song in endless different ways.
Story songs can be exceptions.
At times, there is one specific story you are trying to tell, and you have to be locked into one way of writing that song.
99.9% of the time, that is not the case.
Everybody wants to go to heaven leaned in this direction.
Still, we tried to make our map open enough that it didn't tie us down to only one way of telling the story.
As you work at blueprinting, give yourself a reality check.
Is your map limiting or opening up possibilities?
If it's limiting you, then you need to work on creating a blueprint that expands your options instead of limiting them.
Chapter 6. Writing to the Title
One Thing
In the movie City Slickers, there is a scene in which a confused and unhappy Billy Crystal asks Jack Palance's character, Slim, the secret to his happiness and contentment.
Palance answers by holding up one finger.
One thing, he says.
I focus on the one thing I know how to do and do well.
I would say the same thing is the secret of a successful song.
Make it about one thing.
Be careful about meandering and going off topic in your song.
Have you ever attended a talk and the speaker never seems to get to the point?
Or the speaker makes a number of points and you're not sure what the main message was by the end?
Or have you been on a phone call and the other person rambles from topic to topic, leaving you squirming and wanting to ask,
Why did you call me?
Your song should have one message.
Get to the point and stick with that point.
Here are a couple of ways to determine whether or not your song is focused and clear or not.
First, summarize your whole song in one short sentence or phrase.
If you can get it down to five to seven words, even better.
Remember, no commas, ands, buts, and so on.
If you can't boil it down to one phrase, it probably isn't focused enough yet.
Next, play the song for several people who haven't heard it and ask them to summarize what the song is about in one phrase.
If their responses are all not pretty close or they're all over the place.
You've got some work to do editing the song to make it about the one thing you're trying to communicate.
One of the biggest mistakes I see when mentoring writers is that they want to try to say everything in one song.
One big point is plenty to digest in a three-minute song.
If you have a big enough big idea, you shouldn't need to bring in other big ideas.
If you are fighting the temptation to talk about several big ideas, you need to stop and evaluate whether your big idea is big enough.
Some ideas are not big enough to sustain a whole song.
Writing to your title.
I came across some songwriting instruction that was about writing from your title some time ago.
But I think it is more to the point to write to your title.
Let me explain.
Each verse and section of the song needs to set up the big idea of the chorus, which is usually the title or the hook.
Everything in the song should point toward that big idea.
In fact, it would be cool if each line in your song could be followed by the title and it would make perfect sense.
Some of my better songs work this way.
In fact, my first publisher used to have me do this as an exercise.
He would have me read him one line from my song followed by the title.
Then I would move on to the next line and read the title again.
It was very eye-opening for me to see how directly each line in my song needed to point to that hook or title.
In the classic Bonnie Raitt hit, I Can't Make You Love Me, co-written by Mike Reed and Alan Shamblin,
the singer is talking about loving someone who doesn't love them back.
They don't get into the idea of how will I ever live without you or how did it come to this or even is there any way I can make you love me?
Everything in the song points to the one singular idea of I can't make you love me.
I can't make you love me if you don't.
I can't make your heart feel something it won't.
It's really just saying the same thing twice, but it brings home the one message.
The Lee Bryce song, I Drive Your Truck, co-written by Jimmy Urie, Connie Harrington, and Jesse Alexander,
does a good job of writing to the title or hook.
The first verse ends with the line,
People got their ways of coping, oh, and I've got mine.
The second verse ends with the line,
Mama asked me this morning if I'd been by your grave,
But that flag and stone ain't where I feel you anyway.
And the bridge ends with this,
These days when I'm missing you this much,
they all lead smoothly into the first line of the chorus,
I Drive Your Truck.
Where to put your title or hook?
The title is usually in the first or last line of the chorus, or both.
Sometimes choruses consist of only the title as the lyric.
The title repeats several times, but there are no other lyrics.
Think Bruce Springsteen's Born in the USA.
The Beatles had a number of title-only choruses.
We Can Work It Out.
Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds.
Good morning, good morning.
I Want to Hold Your Hand.
And Girl.
The police's Roxanne use the same technique, as does Adele's Rumor Has It.
Some songs put the title in refrains or in the words that lead up to the chorus.
Bob Dylan's Tangled Up in Blue is one of those refrain songs,
and each verse leads to the title line.
Or the title could be the setup line for the chorus.
In general, it's hard to use your title too many times in your song.
After all, this is the big idea of the song.
It's the whole reason why you wrote the song in the first place.
If everything in the song points to your title, you will likely have a very clear, very understandable lyric.
Why not write from my title?
The problem with writing from your title is that most of us tend to wander without a clear destination.
If I take my title and start writing from it, I might wander off into areas that really have nothing to do with the original idea.
Writing from gives you room to chase squirrels and wander around.
Writing to gives you direction.
You know where you are going and where everything is going to wind up.
Resist the urge to write outward from your title and work at getting in the habit of writing toward that title every time.
The ultimate goal.
The ultimate goal for your song, if you are pursuing a commercial recording of it,
is that it be, one, an earworm.
The audience can't get it out of their heads.
Two, memorable.
The audience can sing along after hearing it once.
And three, something they can't get enough of.
How do you pull off those three things?
You use unforgettable melodies and some repeating lyrics.
Remember I told you that when Johnny Reed first played our song, Fire It Up, at a show,
he sent me a video of a crowd of 68,000 people singing along on chorus two.
The chorus was repetitive and memorable.
After they heard it once, they could sing it.
The same thing happened with my Blake Shelton cut, Doing It to Country Songs.
The chorus is the hook repeated four times.
Hear it once, and you can sing along.
Not every song needs that much repetition.
But if your chorus is hard to remember, it's much less likely to get recorded.
Artists want songs that get the audience singing along.
Why?
Because audiences that are singing along are engaged at a different level than audiences that are simply listening.
Singing along gives the audience a voice.
And people who feel like they have a voice buy in at a level that increases sales of concert tickets and merchandise.
You can help the artist achieve those goals by writing songs that wind up at a title they can't get out of their head and that they want to sing along with.
That's the ticket to a successful concert and to a successful career as a songwriter.
Where do I start?
I almost always start with the title, but I envision it being in the middle of a blank piece of paper,
and I look at the other pieces of the song as circles that point to that phrase in the middle.
This keeps me on target all of the time.
In a co-write, it helps me easily filter out what does belong in my song and what does not.
If the line is great and it points toward my title, it probably belongs.
If a line really doesn't point at my title at all, then I throw it out even if it is a great line.
Many, many songs have been killed by a great line that didn't support the big idea of the song.
Great writers learn to cut even their most treasured lines or phrases.
Even if they come up with a great line, it gets thrown away unless it points to the title and makes the song better.
Holding on to a great line that doesn't support your title is like holding on to the railing of the Titanic.
It is eventually going to take you down.
As an exercise, get a blank piece of paper and write one of your titles in the center.
Then brainstorm different ways you could write toward or set up that title.
See how many different ways you can come up with.
Choose the best ones and sort them into the most logical sequence.
You've created the initial drawing or a blueprint for writing your title.
Writing to your title is like making sure that everything in your southwestern-style home fits with that style.
You wouldn't put gothic columns or a modern glass and steel edition on it.
And you probably wouldn't decorate or furnish a log cabin in the mountains the same way you would do a condo at the beach.
The more focused and direct you learn to be in your use of your titles, the stronger your songs will be.
Chapter 7. Finishing Touches. Lyric Editing.
Book authors say that most good writing is rewriting.
Similarly, I've heard it said that good songs are written and great songs are rewritten.
I've found that going back to my songs a week or two after I write them and running through this quick checklist helps me catch and fix many of the major flaws that can exist in a song.
That gives me time enough to get a little perspective and not be so attached to the first draft of the song.
Lyric Pitfalls.
Inconsistent rhyme schemes in sections.
Probably the easiest lyric pitfall to spot and correct is having inconsistent rhyme schemes in sections.
If the first and third lines in the first verse rhyme with each other and the second and fourth lines in that verse also rhyme,
keep that rhyme scheme in the second verse and subsequent verses.
One of the things that grabs listeners is repeating patterns and your listeners will be unconsciously expecting you to repeat rhyme schemes as well as melodies and rhythms.
While I am writing, I go back to the first verse and check when I start crafting the next verse.
Was it A-A-B-B or A-B-A-B or A-A-A-B or A-B-A-C with the letters representing one rhyme sound?
A-A-B-B would mean that lines 1 and 2 rhyme with each other and lines 3 and 4 rhyme with each other on a different rhyming sound.
Of course, you can change rhyme schemes in different sections.
The verse may be A-B-A-B, but the chorus could be A-A-B-B.
In fact, that is often more interesting than keeping the same rhyme scheme across different sections.
So, when you're editing, make sure you check for consistency in the rhyme schemes within sections.
Of course, there may be a time when you break the pattern for a reason,
but make sure you're conscious of doing so and that it just doesn't happen by accident.
Changing pronouns and points of view.
There are three points of view you can use in a song.
First person, I, me, mine, we, our.
First person is a person speaking about himself or herself.
I went to the grocery store.
That pork pie hat is mine.
That song really meant something to me.
Michael Jackson's hit, Man in the Mirror, written by Seda Garrett and Glenn Ballard, uses mostly first person.
I'm starting with the man in the mirror.
Second person, you, yours.
Second person involves one person talking to another.
Second person uses words like you and yours.
Carly Simon's You're So Vain shows the use of second person.
You probably think this song is about you, don't you?
Your scarf.
It was apricot.
Third person.
They, theirs, him, he, her, she.
Third person talks about others using words such as they, him, her, and theirs.
John Cougar Mellencamp's Jack and Diane uses third person throughout, except when he's using dialogue.
Jack, he sits back, collects his thoughts for a moment, scratches his head, and does his best James Dean.
Well, now then there, Diane, we ought to run off to the city.
Any of these points of view are fine.
In fact, you might play with changing your lyrics from one to another to discover if the song works better in one voice over the other.
What typically doesn't work is switching from one point of view and set of pronouns to another in the same song.
Again, except if you're putting in dialogue between the song characters.
So when going over your song to make sure it is clear and makes sense, check for inconsistent pronouns.
If you are talking to your lover in one verse, don't start talking about her in the chorus.
It can start to sound like this if you do.
Verse, I can't believe how you've changed my life.
Chorus, I don't know what I'd do without her.
The woman you are talking to is going to look at you with a shocked look on her face.
Who are you talking about, fool?
If you are talking to someone in your song, keep that voice throughout.
If you are talking about someone, maintain that voice.
Unclear pronouns.
If there are several male or female characters in your song,
make sure the listener knows to whom you are referring when you say she or he.
Making the listener try to figure out who this particular he or she is might take them out of the song
and start them thinking too much.
Now, there could be times to use this ambiguity as part of the point of the song,
as Glenn Frey did in his song, The One You Love,
in which he's writing about a lover having to choose between the guy she is with now and her previous love.
Because it is not clear which one she will choose,
the chorus line uses ambiguous pronouns to keep us guessing.
Someone's going to cry when they learn they've lost you.
Someone's going to thank the stars above.
Again, if you use ambiguity, make sure you are doing it for a purpose and not by accident.
Inconsistent verb tenses.
A similar problem to the pronoun problem in some songs is that they use inconsistent verb tenses.
Present tense uses words such as is or have.
Past tense uses words such as was, were, or had.
You were the right one for me.
Our love was the best thing that ever happened to me.
We lost what we once had.
Future tense uses will be or will have.
Come on out tonight, girl, and we'll have a good time.
This will be the best thing for you and me.
Most modern songs are written in present tense.
There is something more immediate and engaging about bringing your listener to one moment.
But some songs use past or future tense and they work just fine.
What doesn't work is confusing the listener by switching tenses.
The song starts in present tense, then goes to past tense, back to present, and then it throws in some future tense.
Your listeners won't know which way is up.
Go over your song and make sure you have used consistent verb tenses.
Or if you have switched, you've done so deliberately and that it isn't confusing to the listener.
Time frame jumps and scene jumps.
Another problem I see in some songs I critique is that the writer has made some big time jumps or scene jumps in the song from section to section.
In the first verse, the characters are in the bedroom.
And in the next verse, they're on a Caribbean island.
That could work in some songs, but it's often jarring and confusing.
Same thing with time jumps.
The second verse is 10 years later, but it's not clear how or why that much time has passed.
Sometimes this indicates that you are getting too complex and ambitious with your lyrics.
Remember, keep it simple and focus on one idea or emotion.
Sometimes you just haven't brought the listener along with you and adding a pre-course or bridge or changing a few lines can make it all clear and not so herky-jerky.
Twisting a line to make a rhyme.
In my song coaching, mentoring, and critiquing, a common error I notice is that the songwriter is trying so hard to create a rhyme that lyrics sound unnatural or don't make sense.
In the past, writers could get away with this in songs.
But modern songs are more conversational.
And this tortured rhyme situation can distract or lose the listener.
Sometimes the lyrics sound like Elizabethan English.
You're what I need to live.
To you, all my love I will give.
Try this simple test.
Imagine walking up to someone and saying your lyric to them.
Would that lyric sound like something you would say in everyday life?
Would your wife believe you were sincere if you said that?
Or would she ask you what you had been drinking?
If you wanted to go get some coffee with a friend, would you say, I would like to know.
With me to get some coffee, would you like to go?
No.
You would probably say, want to go for coffee?
That sounds more conversational and normal.
I'm not saying you can't use poetic lyrics that you wouldn't normally say in everyday life.
Just don't torture the syntax by twisting words around to force the rhyme.
Find another rhyme or just skip rhyming that line in favor of being clear and conversational.
I can almost always tell when a writer was struggling for a rhyme.
Something that is very conversational takes a sudden turn and starts to sound like something
Yoda would say in Star Wars.
You don't want to sound like, when 900 years old you reach, look as good you will not.
Keep things real and conversational unless your lyric calls for something more poetic.
I'll always be able to tell, and I'll call you out on it if I'm mentoring you.
The Songwriter's Assumptions.
Leaving out important information.
Since you know what your song is about, you can sometimes inadvertently leave out important
information in the lyrics since it's all clear to you.
This is the songwriter's assumption trap.
You assume your listener knows what you know, but they only know what you tell them.
Songwriter and song teacher, Ralph Murphy, was once doing a song critique, and the songwriter
said, let me tell you the context of this song so you will understand it when I play it for you.
Murphy said, absolutely not.
You won't have the chance to tell the radio listener or the record executive or the publisher
the context before they hear it.
Play the song.
If you play your song and then ask your listeners what the song is about, do they get it or is it confusing?
Or do they understand it in a way that is radically different from what you meant the song to be about?
Again, many listeners will bring their own interpretation to songs and you can leave some room for their imaginations.
But I'm talking about confusing them or not having a clear message because you've left out some crucial information in the lyrics.
Exercise.
Play your song for some listeners, one at a time, and ask them to tell you what the song is about, who the characters are, and what happened in the song.
If you get confusing or wildly different stories, it's time to go back and edit the song for clarity.
Second verse-itis.
A sometimes fatal song disease.
There are many ways that a song can start to go wrong in the second verse.
Don't let these song killers crop up in your second verses.
Here are some of the prime killers.
Saying the same thing as the first verse in different words.
You have to give the listener something more in the second verse.
Saying the same thing again bores them and they'll turn your song off.
Chasing rabbits.
Many times writers can't think of something new to say in the second verse, so they just say anything they can think of.
It doesn't say the same thing as the first verse, but it really doesn't say anything at all.
Saying the opposite of the hook.
If your hook is, I don't love you anymore, and your second verse says, I still love you, then you've got confused listeners and a problem to fix.
Second verses have to support the hook, the title of the song.
Moving time in a way that is confusing or that assumes the listener will know that time has gone by.
Movements in time have to be spelled out clearly.
Generally, you should make sure that you are moving time in one direction.
Jumping from present to future to past is confusing and hard to follow.
Dropping the ball.
Often writers say everything they can think of to say in the first verse in chorus.
The second verse drops the ball and just isn't as interesting or well-written as the rest of the song.
Sometimes when this happens to me, I move my first verse down and make it the second verse.
Then, I write a new first verse.
Doing that forces me to rethink how to get my listener into my song.
Your second verse needs to be equally strong as your first verse and chorus, if not stronger.
If you set the bar high enough for your second verses and don't let these five killers ruin your lyric, you will find yourself writing second verses that really add to the song instead of just being placeholders.
As an exercise, try moving your current first verse to the second verse and write a new first verse to the hook or title.
This makes you think about writing to your title in a different way.
Checklist for editing and improving your song.
Here are some things to consider checking and fixing before you declare your song done.
One, is my message clear?
I like to run my song by someone else for feedback.
I ask them to summarize the message of the song.
If they don't get out of it what I intended, I work on it some more and check with them again.
As a songwriting mentor, I find myself critiquing thousands of songs for other writers.
In most of those sessions, I find myself asking, what were you trying to say?
And then upon hearing the answer, I respond, well, why didn't you say that?
I'm firmly convinced that many of us make songwriting harder than it has to be.
We are more concerned with trying to be clever, adding furniture into our lyric or copying something on the radio than we are with simply communicating what we want to say.
As an exercise, I challenge writers to write a super simple and clear lyric that says just what they want to say.
It's harder than you think, but it can yield amazing results.
When you write, try putting communication at the forefront.
First, say what you mean to say.
Then go back and see if you need to make it fresher or more interesting.
Many times, you won't even need to do that.
I always use the song, I can't make you love me, as an example of clear, strong communication.
Because I can't make you love me if you don't.
You can't make your heart feel something it won't.
Here in the dark, in this final hour,
I will lay down my heart and I'll feel the power.
But you won't.
No, you won't.
Because I can't make you love me if you don't.
Nothing wild or crazy.
No furniture at all.
Clear communication.
I don't know how many times I've had writers tell me,
well, country music has to make sense, but pop music doesn't.
My answer is always, but what if it did?
How huge would some of those big pop hits be if they made sense?
Ryan Adams recently released a cover of a complete Taylor Swift album.
Ryan Adams is a great songwriter.
I'm guessing that he covered Taylor's album because she writes great songs.
That makes sense.
Challenge yourself to be clear and concise.
Put communication ahead of clever.
Two, are my pronouns consistent and clear?
If I have more than one female in the song,
is it clear each time I say she or her,
which one I'm talking about?
The same goes for pronouns referring to objects.
Pronouns can be tricky and confusing.
I always give them a last minute checkup.
Three, did I write to my hook?
Many times we tend to wander, especially in second verses.
We say everything we can think of to say about our hook in verse one,
and then we just make something up in the second verse.
I check every piece of the song to make sure it points to and supports my hook.
Four, does anything in my song work against my hook?
You'd be amazed at how many times I critique a song
and there are lines that actually say the opposite of the hook.
That makes your song confusing.
If your song is about someone leaving for good,
it doesn't need to say,
I believe you'll come back.
Five, do I have extra or useless words?
If a word doesn't add to the song,
I try to take it out.
Do I really need that and, but, just, or cause?
If not, it goes.
Six, do I have lines or words that are hard to sing?
If so, I try to fix them so that the song sings easily and naturally.
Singers pay close attention to this, so writers should too.
Seven, does the timeline of my song make sense?
If you switch between past, present, and future, it can be hard to follow.
Eight, how does my song portray the singer?
Whether it's me singing it or some famous artist,
you want the audience to sympathize or like the singer.
If your song makes the singer appear to be a jerk,
not many audiences will want to hear it,
and few singers will want to sing it.
Nine, is my lyric believable?
Does the song sound natural and honest,
or does it sound like someone sat in a room trying to rhyme?
I like my lyrics to sound like something someone would really say,
with some rare exceptions.
Ten, did I stay focused on one idea?
My hook or title.
If everything in the song points to that one idea,
probably have a good lyric.
If you wandered all over the place,
you probably need to rewrite and focus in a little more on the hook.
Eleven, would I pay money for this song?
You have to make a listener get up and go to a store to buy your song,
or at least buy it online.
If you don't cause them to care that much,
there's not much hope for your song.
So be honest with yourself.
Would you pay money to hear it over and over?
Ignoring the rules of songwriting and learning to communicate.
The more I teach and mentor,
the more that I see that it's not about songwriting rules,
but about learning to write and rewrite
until you are communicating precisely what you intend.
If you do that, then there aren't many rules.
Map out your song so that you know precisely what you are trying to communicate.
Then make sure you are communicating clearly and forget the rules.
If you and I are having a conversation, there are no rules.
But if I want you to understand me, I must learn to communicate clearly.
While there are not really rules in songwriting, there are rules in communication.
If you break those rules, which are covered in the checklist above, people won't understand your song.
I was mentoring an aspiring songwriter once, and he knew the song wasn't quite working.
I gave him my thoughts about why it wasn't working, and I asked him what rule he had broken in the song that had been critiqued.
He said,
I changed from first person in the verses to second person in the chorus.
I replied,
That's not a songwriting rule.
He looked relieved.
Then I said to him,
Johnny, you have always been a great friend to me.
I appreciate the way you're always there when I need you.
He is an awesome guy.
I'm glad I got to know him.
Suddenly, he got it.
He didn't break a songwriting rule.
He just communicated in an odd way.
Just as you would be confused if I'm talking to you directly, and then I start talking about you,
your listeners aren't going to know what happened if you switch from talking to to talking about.
My co-author, Bill, told me about a time he was writing with pro songwriter,
Chuck Jones.
In one of the verses they were writing, they repeated a word.
Bill had learned the rule.
Never repeat a word if you don't have to.
Since there are so few words in a three-minute song, every word is precious.
Bill mentioned the rule to Chuck, and Chuck agreed that not using the same word twice in the verse was generally a good policy.
But since it really worked to repeat the word in this context, he said, since we know that rule, Bill, we can just ignore it.
Bill laughed, and they moved on to finish the song.
Sometimes good communication requires repeating a word.
It's fine to do in those instances, and fine to do in your song if you're doing it to enable clear communication instead of just being lazy and not wanting to think of a new way to say what you're saying.
As an exercise, try reading your lyric aloud, as if reading a letter to someone.
If you pay close attention as you read, you can often catch mistakes on the fly or find pieces that won't make any sense to the listener.
Just read it like, Dear Amy, a woman is a mystery a man just can't understand.
You will be amazed at what you can catch with this trick.
Kill your darlings.
Writer William Faulkner gave this advice to writers when editing a draft.
In writing, you must kill all your darlings.
Sometimes, my co-writers and I have written a really killer line.
But when we start editing, we realize that as cool as this line may be, it doesn't fit, or it leads us down some blind alley or dead end.
I have learned that what Faulkner said is true.
Often, to come out with our best song, we need to kill our darlings.
Our co-wlines that just don't work in this song.
I always remind myself that my co-wline could always be used in another song later.
Over the years, I have become almost Buddha-like and not being attached to any particular lyric.
If it doesn't serve the song, out it goes.
Well, maybe I'm not quite Buddha-like yet.
Since I sometimes keep that line or phrase and find out if I can use it in another song, I can't always completely let it go.
We have a motto in our pro-writing rooms that the song is king.
That means that everything that doesn't serve the song, the king, goes away.
If everyone in this room is dedicated to making this song you're working on awesome, you've got your best chance of writing something great.
Sometimes that means letting go of a killer line that just doesn't help this particular song.
The point is that most great songs get written and rewritten.
Some in the writing room with my co-writers and some after the main writing session is done.
We may come back and work on that song through several sessions if we think the song has promise and it still doesn't feel like it's 100% there.
You may have noticed that this was perhaps the longest chapter in the book.
That is because revision and rewriting are crucial to ending up with the best song you can possibly write.
Chapter 8. Using song blueprinting in co-writing sessions.
I live in Nashville.
I live in Nashville.
And Nashville is a co-writing town.
So is Los Angeles.
So is Stockholm.
And New York.
Most writers these days co-write.
Because not many of us are world-class lyric and melody writers.
So we seek out people who are great.
Where we are weak.
And through collaboration.
We elevate our writing instantaneously.
Most modern songs that get recorded and released.
Whether in pop or country.
Involve more than one writer.
Sometimes they involve nine or ten even.
But writing with co-writers presents a challenge.
All of the writers have to get on the same page.
Or they'll end up writing at cross purposes.
And wasting time.
I remember a co-write early in my career.
Before I had developed song blueprinting.
My co-writers and I started at 10 a.m.
And were still writing at 2 p.m.
We were struggling.
Suddenly one of my co-writers threw out a line.
That seemed to come from left field.
I said.
This song is about a guy meeting a girl in a bar.
Right?
And my co-writer said.
No.
It's about a husband and wife.
Arguing.
We had been writing two different songs.
For four hours.
No wonder we were struggling.
These days that doesn't happen in my co-writes.
Even if I don't formally have my co-writers create a blueprint.
Before we start building our song.
I make sure we are all on the same page.
Before we go very far.
If all the co-writers know song blueprinting.
We may stop and formally make a blueprint.
But even when I'm writing with people who don't use formal song blueprinting.
I have informal ways of getting us on the same page.
I'll ask.
What are we trying to say in this section?
Or.
I'll give my one sentence summary of that song section.
If my co-writers have different ideas.
They'll speak up.
And we'll discuss it.
Until we all agree on the best thing to say in that section.
For instance.
I'll say.
What if we say.
X.
Y.
Z.
In verse one.
A.
B.
C.
In the chorus.
And E.
F.
G.
In verse two.
Next we talk about it.
And agree on what we are trying to say in each part of the song.
Then I know that we're writing the same song from the start.
This has saved us all boatloads of time and frustration.
Song blueprinting in a co-write is an alignment exercise.
In addition to being an exercise in clear communication.
Like it is when you write alone.
It makes sure that everyone knows what we are trying to say.
And that we are all working in the same direction.
When that happens.
You have more fun.
You write faster.
And the songs are generally better.
I have written several number one songs in less than two hours.
Because of blueprinting and getting everyone in the room aligned.
Before we start writing.
Speed is never my goal.
But it is a byproduct of getting everyone aligned.
And planning good communication from the beginning.
I will spend days on a song.
If that's what it takes to make it great.
But I also celebrate when something awesome comes quickly.
Co-writing with recording artists.
Often with an artist.
Because their lives are so busy with performing and promotional activities.
They may only have two hours available.
For the foreseeable future.
To co-write and get our song done.
I spend some time asking the artist.
What they want to say in the song.
We are about to write.
I take notes.
And then feed back to them.
A rough song blueprint of each section.
I make sure they are not only okay with that blueprint.
But they are excited about it.
Before we start speeding down the road to the finished song.
Getting an artist on board and excited about the song we co-write.
Ups the odds that that song will be recorded and released.
And the time I spend asking questions up front pays off.
Because I'm able to write a song that says exactly what the artist wants to say.
I study up on the artist before I meet with them.
By listening to their past and current releases.
And reading or watching any recent interviews.
To get ideas that might work for them.
And where they are in their life.
For example.
If I read an interview.
In which an artist says.
I played 200 shows last year.
And I've been on the road for 10 months.
I'm ready to go to the islands and relax.
I know where their head is.
They want to escape and get away from the stress of their job.
That helps me know what to write for them.
I ask them several key questions.
To make sure we're writing the song that they need.
What kind of song are you missing for your next project?
What do you really want to say in a song right now?
What have you already recorded?
Can I hear some of the songs that you have recorded?
Or that you're planning to record?
Is there a groove or feel.
That you wish you had for your record?
The ideal situation with an artist.
Is to get them to share a title.
They're already interested in writing.
I wrote with a major artist.
Four times before they recorded their record.
Two times we wrote their idea.
Two times we wrote my idea.
Which two do you think they recorded?
Their ideas.
There is no substitute for writing an idea that an artist already has in mind for their record.
That's gold.
And sometimes platinum.
Listening and drawing out what the artist wants is key to getting songs recorded by them.
Bringing out the best in your co-writers.
Asking those kind of questions also works great to get everyone in the room aligned.
That is the goal of blueprinting.
That is the goal of blueprinting and the goal of every write.
Writers who are aligned are going to work together better and create a better song every time.
Writers who are working against each other will be frustrated and will not likely create anything great.
In your co-writes, I would encourage you to take an approach that may be counterintuitive.
I would suggest that you make it your goal to go into each write asking yourself, what can I do to bring out the best in my co-writers today?
My mission every day is to toss up a softball that my co-writer can hit out of the park.
In a good co-write, the results of the write are additive.
That means that the end result is the sum of the talents of the people in the room.
You create a song that is better than either person could create on their own.
In a great co-write, the results of the write are exponential.
Exponential co-writes maximize everyone's contribution to the extent that the resulting song is greater than the sum of their talents.
This is my hope for every co-write I enter.
I want to write a song each day that is exponentially better than the sum of the talents in the room.
Those are special days, and that doesn't always happen.
But that's what I'm striving for every day.
So, how do I make that happen?
I begin by asking my co-writers, how do you work best?
I want to know if my co-writer works best from a title, from a groove, or a melody.
I want to find out if they work slowly or quickly.
I try to determine if they are a detail person or a big picture person.
All of that information helps me figure out how to set my co-writer up for success.
When my co-writer succeeds, I succeed.
Then, I work really hard to give my co-writer space to work at peak performance.
If they work best from a title, I let them throw out titles and I do the same.
If they want to start with a groove or a guitar lick, I let that happen.
If they would prefer to have silence to think, I stay silent.
If they want the chords we have come up with played over and over so they can get the melody or fit the lyrics to the rhythm, that's what I try to do.
I try to adapt my working style to theirs.
Mastering some of those skills can make you a super collaborator, the kind of person everyone wants to write with.
I'm very shy by nature.
I'm not very talkative, but I'm known as a great conversationalist.
I've simply learned to ask questions that let people talk about themselves.
We all like to be around people like that.
So, people perceive me to be a great conversationalist, but I don't really talk that much.
I just ask questions and let people get on a roll talking about themselves.
That's the same principle I'm talking about for co-writing.
Learn to be that person that lets people work in their zone and you'll have co-writers lining up to work with you.
Many of us go into co-writes worried more about how we can impress our collaborators instead of thinking about how we can help our co-writers be their best selves in the right.
Turn that thinking upside down and you will be amazed at the results.
New printing can be the foundation of finding alignment in co-writes.
Being self-aware and focused on maximizing the talents in the room can take your writing to levels you never imagined possible.
One big mistake I see writers make is they try to be so creative that they go beyond real life.
Songs that go beyond real life don't usually sound believable or authentic.
They sound like someone made them up instead of sounding like something real and honest.
Or they discover some quote hit song formula unquote and try to emulate that.
Use the word you in the first verse.
Write at 80 beats per minute.
All because recent hit songs have those things in common.
Formulas tend to make songs feel stiff and stock.
If you want to write hits, you have to go way beyond stiff and stock.
At the end of the day, there are some things that only you can write.
No one else in the world has been through the exact set of life circumstances that you have been through.
That is your real secret weapon after you master the basics of the craft of songwriting.
You are as unique as your fingerprints.
No one else can bring your life experiences, your sense of things, your history, your longings, your heartbreaks, your deep loves, your sense of humor, the music you have heard your whole life, and so on.
To create the same song.
The building blocks of great songs are found in the triumphs and defeats you have experienced.
They are formed out of things you experienced with that crazy family of yours.
We all have those in one shape or form.
Or that bizarre X that put you through the ringer.
You've got a life experience that can create magical songs if you learn how to take your story and make it our story.
A story that millions can relate to.
Where do I start?
You start by being willing to do the dirty work of sorting through all of those good and bad things you've been through.
It can be difficult to spend a lot of time waiting around in the muck of the hard times you've experienced.
But there is so much richness there to put into your songs.
I saw a quote recently that said, there are no strong people with an easy past.
Songwriters who are willing to dive deep into their own pain and actually let themselves feel those things again are able to extract from those hard times what allowed them to overcome.
What allowed them to stand up and move forward?
What changed them?
Those emotions are where the great songs start.
Don't be afraid to fully let yourself feel the good and bad times again.
How can I deal in real?
One exercise that I do when I speak at live events is to have people write down five statements that they would like to say to someone in their life.
I started doing this because I was at an event where people kept playing me songs that felt very forced and contrived.
I was trying to figure out a way to get them out of their songwriting heads and get into their hearts.
The first time I did this exercise, I was blown away by the sentences that people read me.
There were things like, I wish you had stuck around to see the grown-up me.
Why did you say goodbye in a letter?
Do you have any idea how much you hurt me?
On and on they went.
Powerful statement after powerful statement.
I was jumping up and down.
Their next assignment was to go take one of their sentences and brainstorm every song title they could come up with that could communicate the message of that sentence.
Again, powerful song ideas started being thrown out.
So I had them go co-write some of those song ideas with other people from the retreat.
Songs that came out of that exercise were amazing.
People went from writing contrived, shallow songs to songs with depth.
The audience laughed, cried, and cheered as the songs were played that evening.
These songwriters elevated their songwriting exponentially because they were building on a foundation that they cared about.
It turns out, writing about something that you want to say and are passionate about helps you write better.
Who knew?
I suggest this exercise to every writer I work with.
Some have started keeping a journal and writing five sentences each day that they would have liked to have said to someone in their life, past or present, that day.
They're coming up with great song ideas based on their real life experiences.
That's how you deal in real.
You begin by being real with yourself and digging deep to lay that foundation.
Remember, this song house you are building is only as strong as its foundation.
How do I make my story everyone's story?
One of the keys to making your story more universal is to use your story as the base or foundation of the song.
But don't try to stick so closely to the actual names, places, and events that others can't relate.
I told you the story about how early in my career I wrote a song called She Stopped Living the Day He Died about my grandparents.
It was true and very sad.
My grandmother was sort of sad and miserable for about 25 years after my grandfather passed.
I wrote the song really well.
My family cried when I played it.
But when I played it for my publisher, he said,
That's the saddest thing I've ever heard.
No one is going to sing that.
He was right.
It was just my story.
I hadn't tied it into anything universal at all.
I could have taken the big idea behind that story.
Sometimes losing someone makes us feel like we have died.
And written a song that more people could relate to.
Maybe I could have written a song about a guy losing a woman he was madly in love with.
And then struggling to figure out how to carry on when she leaves him.
There are a million ways to write about that big emotion that my grandmother felt without putting in her name, my grandfather's name, the specific jobs they held, etc.
Those things painted a picture that was too specific to be relatable by a larger audience.
In fact, years later, my first hit, Why You Loved Me by Rascal Flatts, went to number one on the charts.
It was about this very emotion.
I was born the day you kissed me.
I died inside the night you left me.
But I lived.
Oh, how I lived.
Why you loved me.
Same emotion and storyline.
But I built a song around it.
It was more relatable to millions of people.
The blueprint for those songs could have been almost identical.
But one was commercial.
And one was way too personal.
Trust yourself.
When you are learning something, you often try to copy your heroes or role models in that area.
Eric Clapton tried to play like his American blues guitar heroes.
But after doing that for some time, he developed his own style.
Then younger guitarists wanted to play like Eric Clapton.
But if they persisted and didn't merely imitate, they went on to develop their own unique styles.
It's the same with songwriting.
Imitate the songs you love at first.
Learn your craft.
I wrote this book to give you some tools to help you write better songs.
But after you apply these tools to build better songs, start to get those craft elements and tools in your bones so that you can forget them and trust yourself.
Songs are human hearts communicating with and reaching each other through words, melodies, and rhythms.
You are the only one who can write the songs you write.
They haven't yet invented the widget that can take the place of the human heart and soul for writing songs and touching other people.
I suspect they never will.
Send off.
Write better songs.
As a songwriting mentor and teacher, I often get questions from aspiring songwriters about how to succeed or become a pro songwriter.
And my first answer is often the same to most of these questions.
How do I get my songs recorded?
Write better songs.
How do I get a songwriting publishing deal?
Write better songs.
How can I attract better co-writers?
Write better songs.
Blueprinting and song building can help you write better and faster.
Learning to communicate more clearly can up your game immediately.
Being willing to dig deep and write from your heart instead of just making up fiction will move your listener in ways you never could with something you just fake.
At the end of the day, there is no substitute for just writing more and more songs.
The 10,000-hour theory suggests that it takes most people 10,000 hours to master something, as long as they stretch a bit regularly and get feedback from an audience or a pro.
That's a lot of songwriting, my friend.
But the principle holds true.
The more songs you write, the more likely you are to write great ones.
If you pay attention and continue to grow in your craft, your 100th song will be dramatically better than your first.
And your 1,000th song will blow the 100th out of the water.
I hope this book helps you write better songs faster, so you can express your creativity in a way that satisfies you.
And if you're aiming to be a professional songwriter, get you closer to that dream and goal.
```

---


# In-Depth Analysis and Report: "Song Building, Mastering Lyric Writing" Transcript

**Authored by Marty Dotson (co-authored by Bill O'Hanlon)**


---

**I. Executive Summary:**
The transcript from "Song Building, Mastering Lyric Writing" presents a comprehensive, practical, and experience-driven guide to professional songwriting, primarily focused on lyric development. Authored by successful Nashville songwriter Marty Dotson, the material emphasizes a structured, methodical approach termed "Song Building," with its cornerstone being "Song Blueprinting." The book aims to demystify the songwriting process, moving it from a purely inspiration-based activity to a craft-driven profession. It covers foundational song structures, idea generation, lyric detailing ("furniture"), editing, and collaborative best practices. The tone is instructional, encouraging, and filled with actionable advice and examples drawn from Dotson's extensive career.

---

**II. Author's Credentials and Premise:**

* **Marty Dotson:** Establishes significant credibility by citing his achievements:
    * Thousands of songs written.
    * 6 number one songs.
    * Over 125 songs recorded by diverse artists (Joe Cocker, Carrie Underwood, Rascal Flatts, Kenny Chesney, Blake Shelton, Plain White Tees, etc.).
    * Experience across multiple genres: pop, rock, country, bluegrass, musical theater, and notably, K-pop (co-wrote "Bounce," a #1 hit in South Korea).
    * Co-founder of Songtown USA, an online songwriting community.
* **Bill O'Hanlon (Co-author):** Mentioned for his prolific writing background (38 books, Oprah feature), primarily assisting in the book's structure and writing process, though the voice is solely Dotson's.
* **Central Premise:** Professional songwriting is not about passively waiting for inspiration ("inspiration is rarely enough"). It's a "job" that involves deliberate construction ("song building") using methodical techniques. This approach leads to better songs written more efficiently.

---

**III. Core Methodology: Song Building and Blueprinting**

This is the central pillar of Dotson's teaching.

1.  **Song Building:** The overarching philosophy of treating songwriting as a constructive process, akin to building a house. It involves elements like structures, blueprinting, framing, furniture, and finishing touches.
2.  **Song Blueprinting:**
    * **Definition:** A clear outline or map of the song *before* writing lyrics, boiling each section down to one simple idea (a single sentence or statement).
    * **Purpose/Benefits:**
        * Ensures clarity and avoids getting stuck (especially in Verse 2).
        * Saves time, particularly in co-writing by aligning collaborators.
        * Facilitates clear communication with the listener.
        * Helps determine if a song idea has enough potential.
    * **Analogy:** Building a house without a blueprint leads to errors and omissions. Bill O'Hanlon's book-writing experience (3 years for first book vs. months for later ones using blueprinting) is cited.
    * **Process:** Focus on blueprinting two verses, the chorus, and the bridge (if used). The pre-chorus is usually part of the verse idea.
    * **Key Principle:** The blueprint should define *what* you want to communicate in each section, not *how* you'll say it, thus opening up creative possibilities rather than limiting them. Good blueprints avoid excessive complexity (e.g., multiple ideas connected by "ands" or commas in a section's summary).

---

**IV. Detailed Chapter-by-Chapter Analysis (as per transcript flow):**

**Introduction & Author Background:**
* Dotson introduces himself and his extensive credentials across various genres, including an unexpected K-Pop hit.
* He contrasts amateur (waiting for inspiration) vs. professional (scheduled, disciplined work) songwriting.
* The "song building" method is introduced as a way to write best songs quickly, consisting of structures, blueprinting, framing, furniture, and finishing touches.
* Co-author Bill O'Hanlon is introduced, emphasizing the book is in Dotson's voice.

**Chapter 1: Song Structure and Blueprinting**
* Reiterates blueprinting as the crucial first step.
* **Modern Commercial Song Structures:**
    * **Form 1:** Verse - Pre-Chorus (Channel/Lift) - Chorus - Verse - Pre-Chorus (optional in V2) - Chorus - Bridge (Middle Eight) - Chorus.
    * **Form 2:** Verse - Chorus - Verse - Chorus - Bridge - Chorus.
    * Notes exceptions (no bridge, chorus repeats, chorus start as production choices). Mentions refrains as an alternative to choruses but less common in modern commercial songs.
* **Simplified Blueprinting Form:** Verse 1 ( Pre-Chorus), Chorus, Verse 2 ( Pre-Chorus), Bridge (only if needed).
* **Purpose of Each Song Section:**
    * **Verse 1:** Introduce character, context, setting (who, to whom, where, what's happening, relationship). Establishes everything needed to follow the song. Example: Prince "Purple Rain," The Beatles "Yesterday," Dotson's "Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven."
    * **Chorus:** The point of the song, big idea/emotion. Contains the title. No new characters/storylines. Examples: The Eagles "Life in the Fast Lane," Michael Jackson "Man in the Mirror."
    * **Verse 2:** Takes the big idea/emotion further. Answers "Then what?". Must advance the song, not repeat V1 or introduce new characters/context. Crucial to avoid "song killer" second verses.
    * **Bridge (Middle Eight):** Brief musical contrast. Takes idea further, sums up, or introduces a twist. Advances the song. Optional (Kim Williams quote: "Don't build a bridge if there's no river to cross"). Ideal song length (2:45-3:00) often precludes bridges. Dotson estimates <25% of his songs have bridges.
    * **Outro:** Musical end. Usually no new lyrics, may repeat last chorus line.
* **Complete Song Blueprinting Example:** Lyrics for "Must Be Doing Something Right" (Billy Currington) are provided, noting its lack of a bridge.
* **Song Length:** Emphasizes keeping songs short, editing out non-essentials.
* **Exercise:** Guides the reader to create their first song blueprint (V1, Chorus, V2).
* **Keys to Blueprinting:** Simple, clear, direct. One idea per section (avoid commas/ands). Consistent voice.

*(The transcript indicates "In the next chapter, I'll talk about finding the big idea..." then jumps to Chapter 4. The content for Chapter 2 appears later.)*

**Chapter 4: Song Furniture (Elevating Your Song Lyrics with Details, Texture, and Spice)**
* **Core Principle:** "Show, Don't Tell." Use specific details to let listeners draw their own conclusions.
* **Analogy:** Vague song = empty room. Furniture = details for listener to relate to.
* **"Landing the Plane":** Moving from general (30,000 ft view) to specific sensory details (sight, hear, touch, smell, taste). Imagine a video of the song.
    * Example: "I know you're still mad" (telling) vs. "You turn your back when we lie in bed at night" (showing).
    * Vivid examples from "The Highway Don't Care" and "I Drive Your Truck."
* **Elements of Furniture (with numerous song title examples for each):**
    * **Locations:** Specific place names (cities, states, businesses).
    * **People's/Animals' Names:** Adds specificity.
    * **Times/Dates/Days/Seasons/Parts of Day:** Grounds the song.
    * **Colors:** Adds visual appeal.
    * **Weather:** Creates atmosphere.
    * **Objects:** Concrete items.
    * **Body Parts:** Relatable and often emotive.
    * **Numbers:** Adds specificity.
    * **Brand Names:** Adds realism (generally no permission needed if used positively).
    * **Specific Actions/Descriptive Verbs:** More engaging than generic verbs (e.g., "tangled" vs. "involved").
    * **Age:** Specific and relatable.
    * **Dialogue:** Brings scenes to life (examples: "Ode to Billy Joe," "The Chair").
    * **Noun Modifiers:** Makes nouns more interesting/specific (e.g., "deep blue need you eyes," "last call kissing").
    * **Phrases Turned into Nouns:** Creative way to add texture (e.g., "cups of who cares," "get my forget you on").
* **Moving Furniture/Furniture Warning:** Use the right amount; too much is cluttered, too little is bare.
* **Summary of Furniture Categories:** Sensory words, props, names, numbers, times, dialogue, locations, juicy verbs, modifying adjectives, phrases as nouns.

**Chapter 2: Ideas and Hooks** *(Appears here in the transcript, out of numerical sequence)*
* **Central Idea:** Song should be about one clear, focused "big idea" (big enough for many to care about).
* **Title/Hook:** The entry point, should be memorable.
    * Hook definition: Listener can sing title/hook after a few listens (Johnny Reed "Fire It Up" example).
    * Placement: Often starts/ends chorus.
* **Generating Ideas, Hooks, and Titles:**
    * **Quotation Sites:** Google "love quotes" (images), reellifewisdom.com (movie dialogue).
    * **Random Pages/Words:** From books/magazines (Gary Burr "In Front of the Alamo" example).
    * **Book Titles:** Titles not copyrightable, but avoid very famous ones. (e.g., "Love is a Verb," "All the Pretty Girls").
    * **Inversions/Variations of Well-Known Phrases:** (e.g., "Friends in Low Places," "The House That Built Me").
    * **Lines from Movies/TV Shows:** (e.g., "Blue Clear Sky" from Forrest Gump, "You Had Me at Hello").
    * **Read Lyrics by Top Songwriters:** For inspiration (not theft).
    * **"Rhyme Lines" Book:** (Out of print) for expressions, phrases.
    * **Things People Say:** Eavesdropping (Rivers Rutherford "Real Good Man" example).
    * **Objects:** Look around for inspiration (Toby Keith "Red Solo Cup").
* **Universal Emotions as Song Themes:** Love, unrequited love, meaning of life, cheating, loss, good times, nostalgia, escape.
* **Make Your Song Idea Universal:** Balance personal details with universal appeal.
    * Dotson's "She Stopped Living the Day He Died" example  too personal, publisher rejected.
    * Questions to ask: Who cares? Fresh take? Universal enough?
* **Song Framing:** Finding a unique slant/angle on a universal emotion.
    * Examples: Dirk Bentley "Black" (seduction, not depression), Little Big Town "Girl Crush" (envy of new girl).
* **Brainstorming Unique Angles:**
    * **Associations:** List words/phrases related to title/idea (e.g., "Body Like a Back Road," "Hotel California," "train" example).
    * **Analogies & Similes:** Comparing one thing to another (e.g., "Love is Like Rain," "Love is a Rose").
    * **Opposites/Oxymorons:** (e.g., "The Truth About Lies," "Beautiful Mess," "Live Like You Were Dying").
    * **Multiple Meanings:** Using words/phrases with several interpretations (e.g., "Lie, Cheat, or Steal," "Doing It to Country Songs," "Dirt").
    * **Thinking Outside the Box:** No stupid ideas in brainstorming; explore weird angles.
    * **Find the Truth in Your Idea:** Connects with audience (e.g., "Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven"  truth is people don't want to die *now*).

**Chapter 5: Digging deeper into song blueprinting methods**
* Starts with Abraham Lincoln quote ("Give me six hours to chop down a tree...").
* **Simplicity:** One sentence per section for clarity, as listeners are often distracted.
* **Balance in Blueprinting:** Avoid being too specific (limits flexibility) or too vague (unhelpful).
* **"No ifs, ands, or buts":** Each section summary should be one simple idea.
* **Example: "Let Me Down Easy" (Billy Currington)**
    * Blueprint: V1 (I'm feeling something strong for you), C (If I fall in love, please let me down easy), V2 (I'm so taken by you that you fill my senses).
    * The blueprint defines *what* to communicate, allowing flexibility in *how* (setting, storyline).
* **Using Summary Phrase in Lyrics:** Sometimes the blueprint sentence can be a lyric itself (e.g., "Everybody Wants to Go to Heaven" chorus).
* **Crucial Concept:** A good blueprint *opens up* possibilities; a weak one *limits* them. Contrasts an open vs. a limiting blueprint for "Let Me Down Easy."
* **Story Songs as Exceptions:** Sometimes a specific story dictates a more locked-in blueprint.

**Chapter 6: Writing to the Title (One Thing)**
* **"City Slickers" Analogy:** Focus on "one thing." A song should have one clear message.
    * Test: Summarize song in one short phrase. Ask others to do so.
* **Writing *to* Your Title (vs. *from*):** Every section and line should point towards and set up the title/hook (usually in the chorus).
    * Publisher's exercise: Read a line, then the title; repeat for every line.
    * Examples: Bonnie Raitt "I Can't Make You Love Me," Lee Brice "I Drive Your Truck."
* **Title/Hook Placement:** Typically first or last line of chorus, or both. Can be title-only choruses ("Born in the USA") or refrains ("Tangled Up in Blue").
* **Why not write *from* title:** Can lead to meandering. Writing *to* provides direction.
* **Ultimate Goal for Commercial Song:** Earworm, memorable, audience sings along. Repetitive and memorable choruses achieve this (e.g., "Fire It Up," "Doing It to Country Songs").
* **Starting Point:** Envision title in the center; all other parts are circles pointing to it. "The song is king"  discard great lines if they don't support the title.

**Chapter 7: Finishing Touches. Lyric Editing.**
* "Good songs are written, great songs are rewritten." Review after a week or two.
* **Lyric Pitfalls & Fixes:**
    * **Inconsistent Rhyme Schemes (within sections):** Maintain pattern (AABB, ABAB etc.) within verses, though sections (verse vs. chorus) can differ.
    * **Changing Pronouns/Points of View:** Stick to one (1st, 2nd, or 3rd person) unless using dialogue.
    * **Unclear Pronouns:** Ensure clarity if multiple characters of the same gender.
    * **Inconsistent Verb Tenses:** Stick to one (present, past, future), usually present for immediacy.
    * **Time Frame/Scene Jumps:** Avoid jarring, unexplained jumps.
    * **Twisting Lines for Rhyme ("Yoda Speak"):** Prioritize natural, conversational language over forced rhymes. Test: "Would you say this in real life?"
    * **Songwriter's Assumptions:** Don't assume listeners know what you know; provide necessary context. (Ralph Murphy anecdote).
    * **Second Verse-itis (Fatal Song Disease):**
        * Repeating V1 in different words.
        * "Chasing rabbits" (irrelevant content).
        * Contradicting the hook.
        * Confusing time movement.
        * "Dropping the ball" (weaker than V1/Chorus). Tip: Swap V1 and V2, write new V1.
* **Checklist for Editing (11 points):**
    1.  Message clear? (Communicate first, then be clever. Example: "I Can't Make You Love Me").
    2.  Pronouns consistent & clear?
    3.  Wrote *to* the hook?
    4.  Anything work *against* the hook?
    5.  Extra/useless words?
    6.  Lines hard to sing?
    7.  Timeline make sense?
    8.  How song portrays singer (sympathetic)?
    9.  Lyric believable/natural?
    10. Stayed focused on one idea (hook)?
    11. Would I pay money for this song?
* **Ignoring "Rules" vs. Communication Rules:** Focus on clear communication. Breaking communication norms (like switching POV mid-song) is confusing, not just a broken "songwriting rule." (Chuck Jones anecdote about repeating words).
* **Exercise:** Read lyric aloud like a letter to catch errors.
* **"Kill Your Darlings" (Faulkner):** Be willing to cut great lines if they don't serve the song. "The song is king."

**Chapter 8: Using song blueprinting in co-writing sessions.**
* **Co-writing Prevalence:** Common in Nashville, LA, Stockholm, NY. Collaboration can elevate writing.
* **Challenge:** Aligning all writers. Dotson's anecdote of a 4-hour co-write producing two different songs.
* **Blueprinting as Alignment:** Ensures everyone is writing the same song, saving time and frustration. Even informal blueprinting (discussing section goals) helps.
* **Co-writing with Recording Artists:**
    * Time is often limited.
    * Ask what the artist wants to say; get their buy-in on a blueprint.
    * Research artist beforehand (interviews, past work).
    * Key questions for artists (what song are you missing? what do you want to say?).
    * Artist's ideas are "gold."
* **Bringing Out the Best in Co-writers:**
    * Goal: Help co-writers shine. Aim for "exponential" co-writes (result > sum of talents).
    * Ask how they work best (title first, groove, melody? slow/fast? detail/big picture?).
    * Adapt your style; give them space. Become a "super collaborator."
* **Dealing in Real / Your Unique Experience:**
    * Avoid formulas or being "too creative" beyond real life.
    * Your unique life experience is your "secret weapon."
    * Exercise: Write 5 statements you'd like to say to someone; brainstorm song titles. Leads to authentic, deep songs.
* **Making Your Story Everyone's Story:**
    * Use personal experience as a foundation but generalize for broader appeal.
    * Revisits his "She Stopped Living the Day He Died" (too personal) vs. "Why You Loved Me" (universal version of similar emotion).
* **Trust Yourself:** Imitate heroes, learn craft, then develop your unique style.

**Send Off: Write Better Songs**
* The answer to "How do I get cuts/publishing deal/better co-writers?" is "Write better songs."
* Blueprinting, clear communication, writing from the heart are key.
* **10,000-Hour Theory:** Mastery comes from practice and growth. Your 1000th song will be far better than your 1st or 100th.
* Hopes the book helps writers express creativity and achieve professional goals.

---

**V. Strengths of the Material:**

* **Highly Practical and Actionable:** The book is filled with specific techniques, exercises, and checklists.
* **Experience-Based:** Dotson's advice stems from years of successful, professional songwriting. The anecdotes and examples are illustrative.
* **Structured Approach:** The "Song Building" and "Blueprinting" methods provide a clear framework, especially beneficial for aspiring writers or those feeling disorganized.
* **Comprehensive Coverage:** Addresses idea generation, structure, lyrical detail, editing, and collaboration.
* **Demystifies the Process:** Turns songwriting from a mystical art into a learnable craft.
* **Encouraging Tone:** While professional, the tone is supportive and aims to empower the songwriter.
* **Real-World Examples:** Uses well-known songs and his own hits to illustrate points effectively.

---

**VI. Statistical Overview (from the transcript):**

* Marty Dotson: **6** #1 songs, **>125** songs recorded by other artists.
* Bill O'Hanlon: **38** books written.
* K-Pop Song "Bounce": Reached **#1** in South Korea.
* Ideal Commercial Song Length: **2 minutes 45 seconds to 3 minutes**.
* Dotson's Songs with Bridges: Estimates **less than 25%**.
* "Must Be Doing Something Right": Went to #1 for **two weeks**.
* Johnny Reed's "Fire It Up": Audience of **68,000** people singing along by the second chorus.
* "Doing It to Country Songs" (Blake Shelton): Title/hook repeated **>25 times**.
* 10,000-Hour Theory: Cited as benchmark for mastery.
* Number of characters in hit songs: "Most hit songs involve the singer and one other character." Hard to develop more than **2-3 characters** in a 3-minute song.

---

**VII. Potential Considerations:**

* **Genre Focus:** While Dotson has multi-genre experience, the examples and structural advice lean heavily towards commercial Country and Pop, which is understandable given his Nashville base. Songwriters in more experimental or niche genres might need to adapt some principles.
* **Prescriptiveness:** Some advice (like ideal song length or the "no commas/ands" in blueprinting) is presented strongly. While effective as a teaching tool, experienced writers might find it slightly rigid for all situations. Dotson does acknowledge "no rules" if communication is clear.
* **Repetition:** Some core concepts, particularly around blueprinting and clear communication, are reiterated across chapters. This is common in instructional material for emphasis but could feel repetitive to some readers.
* **Transcript Flow:** The non-sequential presentation of Chapter 2 after Chapter 4 in the *transcript itself* is a structural quirk of the provided document, not necessarily the book. For a reader of the transcript, it's a slight hiccup in flow.

---

**VIII. Target Audience:**

* Aspiring songwriters seeking a structured approach.
* Intermediate songwriters looking to professionalize their craft and improve consistency.
* Songwriters who struggle with completing songs or feeling "stuck."
* Those interested in co-writing, particularly in commercial genres like Country and Pop.
* Lyricists, as the book has a strong emphasis on lyric construction and clarity.

---

**IX. Conclusion:**

The transcript of "Song Building, Mastering Lyric Writing" reveals a rich, practical, and highly valuable resource for songwriters. Marty Dotson's "Song Building" and "Blueprinting" methodologies offer a robust framework for crafting compelling and commercially viable songs. By focusing on clear communication, structured development, and drawing from authentic experience, the book equips writers with the tools to move beyond sporadic inspiration and cultivate a professional, effective songwriting practice. The advice is grounded in extensive real-world success, making it credible and motivating. Despite a slight leaning towards commercial song structures, the core principles of clarity, intentionality, and detailed craftsmanship are universally applicable to the art of lyric writing.